                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                        CASE NO. 2020-12
                  COMPLAINT OF TE RYAN SPECK
                               v.
                     MISSOURI PRESBYTERY
                    DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                         October 21, 2021

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

In July 2018, Memorial Presbyterian Church (PCA) in St. Louis hosted the
first Revoice Conference. Thereafter, several individuals, sessions, and
presbyteries communicated concerns to Memorial and to Missouri
Presbytery. In light of these concerns, in October 2018, the pastor of Memorial
PCA, TE Greg Johnson, and the Session of Memorial PCA each requested
investigations (BCO 31-2 and 41-1) of the allegations. Presbytery directed
different committees to investigate the concerns and allegations, and it heard
reports from these committees during several Presbytery meetings over many
months. In July 2020, Presbytery heard and considered a 97-page report from
its committee conducting a BCO 31-2 investigation of allegations against TE
Johnson. The committee recommended Presbytery decline to find a strong
presumption of guilt on each of four allegations, and Presbytery adopted those
committee recommendations. TE Ryan Speck filed a Complaint against those
decisions, and it was considered by a Presbytery judicial commission. In his
Complaint, TE Speck contended:

        [The Presbytery] Committee erred in its BCO 31-2
        investigation of TE Greg Johnson by failing to act “with due
        diligence and great discretion [to] demand from [TE Johnson]
        satisfactory explanations concerning reports affecting [his]
        Christian character” (BCO 31-2). Namely, that TE Johnson
        did not adequately answer some questions posed to him, and
        what he did answer provides sufficient evidence to raise a
        strong presumption of guilt that his views are not in conformity
        with the Scriptures and the Westminster Standards and,
        therefore, warrant institution of judicial process.

In October 2020, Presbytery adopted the recommended judgment of the
commission and denied the Complaint, which TE Speck then carried to the
SJC. The Hearing was conducted before the full SJC at its Stated Meeting in
Atlanta on March 25, 2021.


                                     730
                                APPENDIX T



After the Hearing, a question arose as to whether the Record of the Case was
complete. The SJC appointed a committee of six members to return a
recommendation on the question. A month later, the SJC adopted four
committee recommendations, which included rescinding the previous ruling
that the Record was complete and sending a letter to Presbytery’s
Representative with 25 questions for TE Johnson. TE Johnson responded to
each, and both parties then filed five-page Addendum Briefs addressing those
responses.

The SJC chairman reconvened an SJC meeting on July 13, 2021, and randomly
drew names for a drafting committee. The committee filed its report on
September 21, 2021. On October 21, 2021, the SJC voted to deny the
Complaint, as shown in the Decision below.

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

1994        Missouri Presbytery (hereafter “Missouri”) produced a report
            titled “Faithfulness to God’s Standards: The Lord’s Calling to
            Homosexually-Inclined Christians” which was an update to a
            1980 RPCES Report titled: “Pastoral Care for the Repentant
            Homosexual.”

2017        Missouri produced an extensive revision and expansion of the
            1994 report, and titled it, “Homosexuality and the Gospel of
            Grace: Faithfulness to the Lord’s Calling in an Age of Sexual
            Autonomy.” The Report was 240 pages, with an additional 260
            pages of appendixes, and was posted on Missouri’s website:
            https://drive.google.com/file/d/1iBLGL_2YhsIcI9_kZCBxLZHS
            YXWhFeLQ/view
05/28/18    TE Johnson published "Reply to ‘Queer Culture in the PCA?’" on
            the Aquila Report defending the upcoming Revoice conference (in
            response to a post by TE Al Baker, "Queer Culture in the PCA?"
            published three days prior).

07/15/18    CrossPolitic Podcast conducted a 1-hour interview of TE
            Johnson.

07/26/18 Memorial Presbyterian Church (hereafter “Memorial”) hosted the
          three-day Revoice 2018 conference. TE Johnson taught one
          breakout session, the transcript of which was in the Record of this
          Case.
                                    731
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



09/07/18   Session of Covenant PCA, Harrisonburg, VA sent a seven-page
           letter to the Memorial Session regarding Memorial’s and TE
           Johnson’s involvement in Revoice 2018.

09/27/18   TE Andrew Dionne sent a letter to the Memorial Session, which
           was co-signed by 20 other PCA TEs. Among other things, the
           letter exhorted Memorial Session “to repent of [their] sin of
           promoting and hosting the 2018 Revoice Conference.”

10/10/18   TE Johnson and Session of Memorial sent a letter to Missouri
           requesting a BCO 31-2 investigation regarding allegations against
           TE Johnson and requesting Presbytery to accept, as a BCO 41
           Reference, the Session’s request for Missouri to also investigate it
           with regard to the allegations pertaining to hosting Revoice 2018.

10/16/18   At a Stated Meeting, Missouri created an ad hoc Committee to
           Investigate Memorial (“CIM”) and tasked it with “investigating
           TE Greg Johnson ... as well as the Memorial Session, according
           to the provisions of BCO 31.2 and BCO 41.1-4, after concerns
           were expressed against it for allowing Revoice 18, an organization
           outside of the jurisdiction of Memorial and outside of the PCA, to
           hold a conference at its church in July 2018.” Members included
           TEs Ron Lutjens (Chair), Bruce Clark, Sean Maney, Ryan Speck,
           and Mike Williams, & REs Kyle Keating, George Poland, and
           Frank Theus.

10/25/18   Calvary Presbytery sent a 9-page letter to Missouri.

11/13/18   Southwest Florida Presbytery sent a 12-page letter to Missouri.

01/15/19   At a Stated Meeting, Missouri heard the CIM report on its
           progress. Missouri referred all letters pertaining to Revoice to the
           CIM (including the letters already sent from Calvary Presbytery
           and Southwest Florida Presbytery).

01/26/19   Savannah River Presbytery sent a one-page letter to Missouri
           supporting the October 2018 letter from Calvary Presbytery.

05/18/19   At a Called Meeting, Missouri considered the 115-page CIM
           report, which had been previously distributed by email. Missouri
           voted to approve the concluding statements and nine judgments.
                                     732
                                APPENDIX T



           Excerpt from Minutes: “TE Johnson shared his testimony to
           provide some context for his decision to host Revoice. He noted
           he wanted to share before the testimony with the Fathers and
           Brothers before it is published in Christianity Today on Monday.”

07/08/19   TE Ryan Speck filed a Complaint with Presbytery regarding
           CIM’s nine judgments approved at the May 18 meeting.

07/11/19   TE Johnson and Memorial Session sent a two-page letter to
           Presbytery responding to the May 2019 CIM Report.

07/16/19   At a Missouri Stated Meeting, TE Johnson provided a report from
           Memorial’s Session to the Presbytery. A committee was
           appointed to respond to Memorial’s response (“CRM”).

08/10/19   Westminster Presbytery sent a 4-page letter to Missouri.

08/--/19   SE Alabama (SEAL) Presbytery sent 5-page letter with
           allegations to Missouri. Later, an “Unofficial” 21-page
           Addendum from SEAL was sent to Missouri.

09/12/19   TE Speck met with Missouri’s Complaint Response Committee
           (“CRM”) for the hearing on his July 2019 complaint.

10/15/19   At its Stated Meeting, Missouri partially sustained TE Speck’s
           July 2019 (Speck 1) complaint and voted to reconsider its
           affirmation of the nine judgments in the CIM report at a future
           called meeting.

           At the same meeting, several requests for investigation of TE
           Johnson were referred to the already existing CRM (formed three
           months earlier). CRM was instructed to begin a BCO 31-2
           investigation of TE Johnson.

           Presbytery also created an ad hoc study committee to create a short
           statement of affirmations and denials regarding human sexuality
           (hereafter, “A&D Committee.”)

11/25/19   Session of Covenant PCA, Fayetteville, AR sent a 5-page letter
           to Missouri.


                                    733
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



12/07/19   At a Called Meeting, Missouri reconsidered the nine theological
           judgments from the May 2019 CIM Report, and adopted amended
           statements to eight of them, referring one question to an ad hoc
           committee to reconsider the question of “Queer Treasure.” The
           newly-amended-and-adopted statements included both affirmation
           and criticism of parts of Revoice. Missouri authorized its Admin
           Committee to draft a letter communicating these changes.

12/22/19   Session of Grace & Peace PCA, Anna TX sent a 3-page letter to
           Missouri.

01/11/20   Central Georgia Presbytery adopted Overture 2 and “requests the
           48th General Assembly assume original jurisdiction of the case of
           the investigation by Missouri Presbytery of Greg Johnson and the
           session of Memorial Presbyterian Church with regard to
           theological error and involvement in the 2018 Revoice
           Conference.”

01/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, Missouri approved modifications to the
           reporting of actions taken on the CIM report—modifications that
           reflected Missouri’s actions taken at its October 15, 2019, Stated
           Meeting and its December 7, 2019, called meeting. The
           Presbytery also authorized the Administrative Committee to issue
           an open letter related to these actions, which was eventually titled
           “An Open Letter from the Administrative Committee to the
           Churches of the PCA and the broader Christian Church.” The
           letter and the updated CIM report were, and are, posted online at
           https://drive.google.com/file/d/1XyxAwY-ACZsVS-pe_barvg2
           _wI9BBJsB/view

           Below is an excerpt from the Open Letter.

               Here is a summary of our actions over the past two
               years .... In late 2018 we convened a committee to
               examine and respond to Revoice and Memorial
               Presbyterian Church's involvement in the conference.
               That committee presented its findings at a called
               meeting of Presbytery in May of 2019. At that meeting
               we approved nine theological judgments and one
               judicial judgment regarding Pastor Greg Johnson and
               Memorial Church. As part of that action, Memorial
                                     734
                               APPENDIX T



              and Pastor Johnson were required to respond to the
              report and a new committee was convened to work
              with them on our findings and judgments. That
              committee work is ongoing. Additionally, we received
              requests from two presbyteries and two local church
              sessions of the PCA to investigate Greg Johnson in
              particular. Those requests were referred to the existing
              committee and that work is ongoing. When the work
              of that committee is completed, they will recommend
              to the Presbytery whether there is a strong presumption
              of guilt of Memorial and Pastor Johnson. If there is a
              strong presumption of guilt for either party, we will
              proceed to a trial.

           Missouri also considered a draft of the Report of the A&D
           Committee and heard the Report of the CRM. Missouri’s
           Moderator informed Presbytery about Overture 2 from Central
           Georgia.

01/25/20   Savannah River Presbytery adopted Overture 4 concurring with
           Calvary’s Overture 2 and requested the same assumption of
           original jurisdiction “with regard to theological error and
           involvement in the 2018 Revoice Conference.”

02/01/20   Platte Valley Presbytery sent a one-page letter to Missouri
           regarding Missouri’s 2017 report, “Homosexuality and the Gospel
           of Grace” and what might be Missouri’s understanding of WCF
           6.5 regarding sin.

04/20/20   Missouri’s Stated Meeting was cancelled due to Covid.

05/2020    The GA’s Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality published
           its 60-page report. Members included TEs Bryan Chapell, Kevin
           DeYoung, Tim Keller and Jim Weidenaar & REs Derek
           Halvorson, Kyle Keating, and Jim Pocta.
           https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-
           48th-GA-5-28-20-1.pdf

06/02/20   At a Called Meeting, Presbytery adopted the 49 Affirmations and
           Denials proposed in its A&D Committee Report. A&D Members
           included TEs Dan Doriani, Mark Dalbey, and Ryan Laughlin &
                                   735
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           RE Sean Maney. The 8-page Report was posted at:
           https://drive.google.com/file/d/197ZR63Fg_TCwOswHjjz7Il2Ja
           F1O7mjI/view
           The 49 A&Ds were in two Parts:

           1. Concise Biblical Theology of Sexuality with Reference to
              Homosexuality
           2. Homosexuality and Identity in Current Debate

07/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, Presbytery heard the 97-page Report of the
           CRM (investigating allegations against TE Johnson) and adopted
           its 8 recommendations. It was posted: https://drive.google.com
           /file/d/18_vvpZg2PwRFwBjwAg4fGp-bhJXh8Mhm/view

           The CRM reported the following had been its understanding of
           its task.

              The first part of the work Presbytery assigned to us in
              the summer of 2019 was to meet with the Memorial
              Presbyterian Church (MPC) Session to clarify the
              commendations, recommendations, and requirements
              which Missouri Presbytery had addressed to Memorial
              after it (MOP) adopted the same at its called meeting
              on May 18, 2019. This part of our work was completed
              in the delivering of our report ... at the stated meeting
              on January 21, 2020.

              The second part of the work assigned to us by
              Presbytery in the fall of 2019 was to conduct an
              investigation after receiving requests from several
              church courts outside our Presbytery to do a BCO 31-
              2 investigation of TE Greg Johnson and his teaching.
              Eventually four letters requesting this were received
              by Missouri Presbytery (MOP). They came from
              Southeast Alabama Presbytery, Westminster Presbytery,
              and the Sessions of Covenant Church in Fayetteville,
              Arkansas and Grace & Peace Presbyterian Church in
              Anna, Texas. Those letters can be found in the
              Appendix at the end.



                                    736
                    APPENDIX T



The CRM recommended Presbytery adopt the following:

   While TE Greg Johnson has, at times, neglected to do
   all he could to clarify the meaning of his views and
   teaching, nevertheless, we the Missouri Presbytery of
   the Presbyterian Church in America, judge each of
   these allegations made against him to be untrue ... and
   find no warrant for a trial since we find no strong
   presumption of guilt [on any of the four allegations].

   Allegation 1: Denies that same-sex-attraction is sinful
   and thereby fails to properly distinguish misery from
   the sin which give rise to it. (Presbytery voted 44-1-4
   to find no strong presumption of guilt for this
   Allegation.)

    Allegation 2: Compromises and dishonors his identity
   in Christ by self-identifying as a same-sex-attracted
   man. (43-1-6)

   Allegation 3: Denies God's purpose and power to
   sanctify SSA believers by minimizing the pursuit of
   orientation change from homosexual to heterosexual.
   (41-2-8)

   Allegation 4: Cannot meet the biblical “above
   reproach” qualification for the eldership since (a)
   homosexual inclinations are sin proper and are more
   heinous for being “against nature,” and since (b) TE
   Johnson identifies as a homosexually inclined man.
   (41-6-4)

The other CRM recommendations adopted by Presbytery were as
follows:

   MSP - We are grateful for TE Greg Johnson’s
   acknowledgment that has not always been as careful
   in expressing himself in his teaching as he should have
   been. We hereby encourage and exhort Greg, our
   brother in Christ, to take great care, going forward, to
   qualify what ought to be qualified, and to clarify all his
                         737
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



               views when he speaks or writes, especially on the
               matter of sexuality; and when it is called for, to explain
               what he is not saying as well as what he is, especially
               with those who have taken offense with things he has
               said, or are likely to.

               MSP - We hereby commend TE Johnson for his
               commitment to the authority of God’s Word in his life
               and teaching for his faithful ministry to the flock of
               God at Memorial Presbyterian Church, and for his zeal
               to see unbelievers savingly encounter Jesus Christ’s
               love through the ministry of the Church, especially
               people in secular LGBT communities.

               MSP - We hereby declare that TE Johnson has been
               and remains an honorable member in good standing of
               Missouri Presbytery.

               MSP - We receive Parts 1 and 2, which are the
               summaries of the allegations and the arguments behind
               the committee’s judgments, as useful for Session study
               and for the perfecting of the Church’s understanding
               of the Scriptural teaching on sexuality and how it can
               be rightly applied in our 21st century setting.

           Presbytery also heard the report of the Committee to Reconsider
           Queer Treasure (the one theological judgment of the CIM not
           approved on December 7, 2019), voting to find fault with this
           lecture given at Revoice 18.

09/17/20   Presbytery received a different complaint from TE Speck regarding
           Presbytery’s adoption of the CRM’s finding no strong presumption
           of guilt on any of the four allegations.

10/20/20   At a Stated Meeting, Presbytery created a BCO 15-3 judicial
           commission to consider TE Speck’s September 17 Complaint, and
           to propose a judgment.

11/10/20   The Complaint Review Commission met and adopted a decision
           denying TE Speck’s September 17 Complaint, with supporting
           rationale.
                                     738
                               APPENDIX T



11/16/20   At a Called Meeting, Presbytery approved the Complaint
           Commission’s proposed denial of TE Speck’s September 17, 2020
           Complaint. The vote was 43-6-1.

12/02/20   TE Speck carried his September 17, 2020 Complaint to the
           General Assembly (Case 2020-12).

01/18/21   SJC Officers declared the Complaint administratively in order
           (OMSJC 9.1.a), ruled the Complaint should be heard by the full
           SJC instead of a Panel (OMSJC 9.3), and ruled the Record of the
           Case was complete and the Complaint was judicially in order and
           ready for Briefs and a Hearing (OMSJC 9.1.b).

03/09/21   Complainant filed his 10-page Preliminary Brief.

03/12/21   SJC met by teleconference. SJC deleted 430 pages from the
           Record, as shown below in an excerpt from those Minutes:

               2020-12 Speck v. Missouri Presbytery. The SJC
               discussed the contents of the Record of the Case
               (ROC). The following motion was made, seconded,
               properly amended and adopted without objection: That
               the Commission delete from the ROC in Case No.
               2020-12 the paper entitled “Homosexuality and the
               Gospel of Grace: Faithfulness to the Lord’s Calling in
               an Age of Sexual Autonomy” (ROC 46-445) as a
               paper not having a “bearing on the complaint” (BCO
               43-6) and being “extraneous to the matter before the
               Commission” (OMSJC 7.4.b) and the Standing Rules
               of Missouri Presbytery (ROC 16-45). The SJC takes
               judicial notice of the Report and Standing Rules;
               therefore, the Parties and SJC members may reference
               them in argument, but SJC members are not required
               to read those documents to qualify for the Case.
               In response to inquiries from SJC members, the
               Chairman ruled that SJC members from presbyteries
               submitting BCO 34-1 Overtures were not disqualified
               from Case No. 2020-12 or Case No. 2020-05 by virtue
               of their presbyteries’ Overtures.

03/15/21   Respondent filed his 10-page Preliminary Brief.
                                   739
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



03/25/21   Hearing was conducted before full SJC in Atlanta with all 24
           judges present. (TEs Coffin and Lucas joined by teleconference.)
           Complainant Speck, his assistant, TE Dominic Aquila, and
           Presbytery’s Representative, TE Tim LeCroy, were present.
           Presbytery’s Clerk observed online.

           After the Hearing, the SJC moved into the Committee of the
           Whole and later rose from the Committee of the Whole. Below is
           an excerpt from the Minutes:

              Chair reported that the committee of the whole
              approved a motion to recommend that the Commission
              rescind the declaration that the case is judicially in
              order, for the limited purpose of perfecting the record
              with answers to written questions propounded by
              members of the Commission. OMSJC 7.4(f). The
              Parliamentarian advised that this motion and process
              were in order. The committee of the whole approved
              a motion to recommend the statement of the judgment
              consisting of ROC page 3, lines 8-28, reformatted in
              the proper form for a statement of the issue. The
              Commission further agreed without objection to
              postpone consideration of the final report of the
              committee of the whole until the Commission next
              meets at the call of the Chair. The Chairman appointed
              the following committee to collect and collate
              questions from members of the Commission and to
              draft parameters to be communicated to Presbytery to
              perfect the Record of the Case ...

04/13/21   The six-man SJC Questions Committee filed its 30-page
           Report. In the course of the Committee preparing its Report, SJC
           members submitted a total of 103 questions, from which the
           Committee recommended selecting 25.
04/30/21   Reconvened SJC Meeting. SJC adopted recommendations from
           the Questions Committee in the following areas.

           The SJC rescinded the Officers’ previous OMSJC 11.1.e ruling
           that the Record in Case 2020-12 is “complete and sufficiently
           documented,” thereby suspending the Officers’ [January 2021]
           ruling that the Case is “judicially in order.”
                                   740
                     APPENDIX T



The SJC agreed to send a letter to Presbytery’s Respondent,
adopting the procedure outlined therein for responses to questions
and supplemental [addendum] briefs, per the authority of OMSJC
7.4.b and 7.4.e.(3) below.

    OMSJC 7.4.b -The hearing body may delete any
    portions of the Record as submitted that violate justice
    or due process, a provision of the BCO or Roberts
    Rules of Order, or that are extraneous to the matter
    before the Commission. The hearing body may also
    require the addition of material to the Record that is
    relevant to the Case. Deletions and additions shall
    always be recorded in the minutes of the hearing body,
    with the approved rationale for the change. Any
    deletions or additions shall be reported to the parties
    and may be addressed in argument from the parties in
    any hearing requested by a party on the ROC.

    OMSJC 7.3.e.(3). After oral argument [on a ROC
    dispute] the parties shall be dismissed and the Panel
    or Commission shall make a decision as to whether in
    fairness and justice the Record of the Case should be
    corrected.

The SJC adopted the Committee’s list of [25] questions for TE
Johnson, as amended, to be sent to Presbytery’s Representative.

Below is the text of the letter sent to Presbytery’s Representative,
which was also sent to the Complainant.

    In the SJC’s deliberations on Case 2020-12, the SJC
    decided the Record does not yet appear to be
    “complete and sufficiently documented” (OMSJC
    11.1.e) and that fairness and justice dictate the accused
    should have a chance to provide additional
    documentation for the Record (per the principle of
    OMSJC 7.4.e.(3)) Therefore, the SJC rescinded the
    SJC Officers’ previous ruling that the Record was
    complete and sufficiently documented, thereby also
    suspending the ruling that the Case was judicially in


                          741
   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



order at present. Here is the procedure we will now
follow.
     We are sending the attached questions to you as
Presbytery’s Representative with a request that you
invite TE Johnson to consider providing written
answers, which would be added to the Record per
OMSJC 7.4.b: “The hearing body may also require the
addition of material to the Record that is relevant to
the Case.” We have copied the Complainant on this
letter.
     We understand that you, as Presbytery’s
Representative, are empowered to represent
Presbytery in the perfection of the Record. Note that
Question #15 in the “Additional/General” category
calls for a response from Presbytery’s Representative. It
is also included in the list for TE Johnson, in case he
needs to assist you with the answer.
     If TE Johnson chooses to answer the attached
questions, please send his response document to the
SJC within 14 days after his confirmed receipt of the
Questions. Please use the email addresses below. If
TE Johnson is able to respond before the deadline, we
would welcome it. If TE Johnson declines, please
notify us promptly.
     If a Response Document is provided, it would be
added to the Record, but there would not be a need to
re-brief or have another Hearing. However, if either
you or the Complainant wish to file an addendum to
your previous Brief, dealing only with any additional
information provided by TE Johnson, the
Complainant’s filing deadline would be seven (7) days
after his receipt of the Response Document from the
SJC, and the Respondent’s would be ten (10) days
after his receipt of the Response Document from the
SJC. Any such additional Briefs are limited to five-
pages.
     If there is no Response Document to add to the
Record, the SJC Chairman would reconvene a SJC
meeting and the SJC would plan to continue with post-
hearing adjudication of the Complaint.


                      742
                                APPENDIX T



                    The SJC does not believe another hearing is
               required, even if TE Johnson responds to the
               questions. However, the SJC would schedule another
               Hearing, on the additional material only, if requested
               by one of the parties within 7 days after his receipt of
               the last additional Brief filed.

           The introduction to the SJC’s 25 Questions read as follows:

                 The SJC believes it is necessary to attempt to clarify
                 the Record of the Case because its magnitude (over
                 600 pages covering multiple years of writing,
                 speaking, and judicial processes) makes it difficult to
                 ascertain if specific representations of perspectives of
                 TE Johnson are his actual or present theological
                 convictions. We understand from the Record:

                   - he has acknowledged some of his perspectives
                     have matured over time;
                   - he has acknowledged some were poorly stated
                     due to time limits, situational pressures, or
                     extemporaneity;
                   - some representations of perspectives are made
                     unclear by imprecision or disagreement over
                     what aspect of sin is being referenced in specific
                     statements;
                   - some representations have been extrapolated by
                     critics but denied by Johnson.

                 Thus, the SJC offers TE Johnson the opportunity to
                 answer questions with reference to the specific
                 Allegations in the Complaint now before the
                 Commission. Below are 25 questions arranged by the
                 Allegations, with a fifth category titled “Additional/
                 General.”

05/11/21   Presbytery answered the SJC Question about the Q&A in the
           Record between the Missouri investigative committee and TE
           Johnson from Fall 2019 and early 2020. This was the one question
           from the SJC directed to Presbytery out of the 25 questions sent
           down.
                                    743
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



05/20/21      TE Johnson provided a 23-page document responding to the
              SJC’s 25 Questions.

05/27/21      Complainant filed a five-page Addendum to his Preliminary
              Brief.

05/31/21      Respondent filed a five-page Addendum to his Preliminary
              Brief. Neither party requested another Hearing.

07/13/21      Reconvened SJC Meeting. Five names were pulled at random to
              comprise a Drafting Committee tasked to present a proposed
              decision. Committee included TEs Coffin and Lee, and REs
              Donahoe, Dowling, and Neikirk.

09/21/21      SJC Drafting Committee filed its report to the SJC.

10/21/21      SJC’s Fall Stated Meeting in Atlanta.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

   1. Did Presbytery violate BCO 31-2 in the manner of its
      investigation of the allegations?

   2. Did Missouri Presbytery clearly err at its meeting on July 21,
      2020, when it declined to commence process on any of the
      following four allegations?

       2.a.     Allegation 1: SSA & sin - TE Johnson “denies that
                same-sex-attraction is sinful and thereby fails to
                properly distinguish misery from the sin which give rise
                to it.”

       2.b. Allegation 2: Identity - TE Johnson “compromises and
            dishonors his identity in Christ by self-identifying as a
            same-sex-attracted man.”

       2.c.     Allegation 3: Sanctification - TE Johnson “denies
                God’s purpose and power to sanctify SSA [same-sex-
                attracted] believers by minimizing the pursuit of
                orientation change from homosexual to heterosexual.”


                                       744
                                   APPENDIX T



          2.d. Allegation 4: Qualification - TE Johnson “cannot meet
               the biblical ‘above reproach’ qualification for the
               eldership since (a) homosexual inclinations are sin
               proper and are more heinous for being “against nature,”
               and since (b) TE Johnson identifies as a homosexually-
               inclined man.”

III. JUDGMENT

   1.       No
   2.a.     No
   2.b.     No
   2.c.     No
   2.d.     No

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

This Reasoning and Opinion briefly explains why the SJC did not find that
Presbytery was unreasonable in its decisions declining to indict.

Issue 1 - BCO 31-2 Investigation

          BCO 31-2. It is the duty of all church Sessions and
          Presbyteries to exercise care over those subject to their
          authority. They shall with due diligence and great
          discretion demand from such persons satisfactory
          explanations concerning reports affecting their Christian
          character. This duty is more imperative when those who
          deem themselves aggrieved by injurious reports shall ask
          an investigation.
              If such investigation, however originating, should
          result in raising a strong presumption of the guilt of the
          party involved, the court shall institute process, and shall
          appoint a prosecutor to prepare the indictment and to
          conduct the case. This prosecutor shall be a member of the
          court, except that in a case before the Session, he may be
          any communing member of the same congregation with
          the accused.

The Record demonstrates Presbytery sought to exercise the requisite “due
diligence and great discretion” in seeking explanations from TE Johnson
                                        745
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



regarding the four allegations. There is no evidence that Presbytery
committed clear error in its procedures in this area. Whether the explanations
provided were satisfactory is a different issue that will be addressed next.

Issue 2 - Four Allegations –

The SJC does not find that the Presbytery clearly erred in its exercise of
judgment when it declined to commence formal judicial process (i.e., declined
to order an indictment and appoint a prosecutor) on any of the four allegations.

Below are those four allegations, followed by quotes from the Complaint in
support of those allegations. The SJC then provides examples of TE Johnson’s
explanations/responses on each allegation. These examples include 9
statements from TE Johnson to the Missouri Presbytery investigating
committee and 19 answers to questions (shown in italics) from the SJC. The
excerpts from the statements before MOP make plausible the conclusion that
it was not unreasonable for the Presbytery to decline to indict. This judgment
is supported by the excerpts from TE Johnson’s answers to the questions posed
by the SJC, questions posed to clarify the Record of the Case because its
magnitude (over 600 pages that included multiple years of writing and
speaking by TE Johnson, as well as various allegations, Presbytery reports,
and judicial processes) made it difficult to ascertain if specific representations
of perspectives of TE Johnson were his actual theological convictions.

                                  Allegation 1
      “TE Johnson denies that same-sex-attraction is sinful and thereby
    fails to properly distinguish misery from the sin which give rise to it.”

Related to this allegation, Complainant contends the following:

        -   “TE Johnson draws a false analogy between the merely
            physical and passive condition of cancer and the spiritual
            and active orientation of homosexuality that goes far
            beyond mere suffering due to the curse.”

        -   “TE Johnson does not believe one can really repent of this
            corruption (i.e., the homosexual orientation), since he was
            made or born this way genetically (CRM Report, p. 10).
            Such "movements of internal corruption" we should flee or
            resist, not mortify or confess (p. 11). You can only "ask


                                       746
                                    APPENDIX T



              forgiveness for a sin, for an action, a word, a thought, a
              deed, a choice ... " (CRM, p. 17).”

          -   “... TE Johnson misplaces same-sex attraction into the
              category of original sin and not into the category of actual
              transgressions.”

          -   “TE Johnson appears to have created a middle ground
              between the Roman Catholic view of concupiscence and
              the Protestant view of actual transgression. He calls the
              enticement to sin sinful (unlike Roman Catholicism), but
              he denies that inward enticement is itself a sin.”

          -   “... TE Johnson consistently affirms that apart from the
              conscious act of the will, a sinful desire is not "a sin" that
              requires formal, true repentance (e.g., CRM, pp. 9-10, 15-
              16, 20). Same-sex attraction is "not 'a sin' unless there is
              volition," according to TE Johnson (CRM, p. 16).”

If the Record demonstrated that the above statements were an accurate
summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper to sustain the
Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it was not
unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not hold these
positions and that he affirms the sinfulness of fallen desires, including all
sexual attractions a person might have to someone not their spouse.

Thus, for example, in response to a question from the Presbytery’s
investigating committee, TE Johnson stated the following:

    GJ:       I don't recall saying that same-sex attraction is a morally
              neutral condition. I have repeatedly stated otherwise. Any
              time I sense an internal sexual or romantic pull toward
              anyone God has not given me—including any male by
              definition—I have to recognize that pull for what it is. It is
              an effect of the fall, yes, but more precisely it is the pull of
              what St. Paul terms the flesh. It's a motion of the internal
              corruption that remains in the believer throughout this life.
              “This corruption of nature, during this life, doth remain in
              those that are regenerated” (see WCF 6.4-6). This
              temptation is “original corruption” and is “properly called


                                         747
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            sin,” even when it does not lead to “actual sin.” Apart from
            Christ, I would carry the guilt of original corruption.”

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:

SJC 1.b. Do you concur that any illicit desire or inclination in your heart (even
if it arises unbidden from the corruption of nature and does not result in an
outwardly sinful act), is properly identified as sin, brings guilt upon you, and
must be confessed, repented of, and mortified? (ROC 923, Q #2)

        Yes, I concur. Sin is not merely transgression of the law of
        God. Sin is any want of conformity unto it. We are not sinners
        because we sin. We sin because we are sinners. I agree with
        WCF 6 that internal corruption is properly called sin. We are
        to turn humbly to God in repentance always, both on account
        of what we do and on account of what we are.

SJC 1.c. Do you believe that you should repent of (i.e., confess as contrary to
righteousness, acknowledge as personal guilt, sorrow for, and strive to
forsake) any corruption of your heart that is present in you due to original sin,
as well as to repent particularly of any particular sins (ROC 928, ln 1ff.)?

        Yes, to both questions. I agree with WCF 15.5.

SJC 1.d. Do you attempt, by saying that “the Christian is called to repent of
(that is, to confess and forsake) actual sins … and to proactively ‘mortify’
original corruption (as well as all the actual sins flowing from it”) [see ROC
928, ln 1ff.] to segregate some aspect of original corruption as a category of
sin that does not carry personal guilt or does not require repentance
characterized by confession, mortification, and forsaking?

        No. That is not my intention. All sin, whether original or actual,
        carries personal guilt and requires all of this.

SJC 2. MOP’s Committee concluded, “We believe it has been and continues
to be TE Johnson’s view that homoerotic desire is sinful – not as “a sin,” an
ungodly volitional act, but as indwelling sin, a particular manifestation or
“motion” (WCF VI.5) of our original corruption.” (ROC 924) How do you
define “motion” and how does that definition comport with other uses of the
term “motions” in the Standards (i.e., Larger Catechism 147 and 148)?
                                      748
                                 APPENDIX T



       In WCF 6.4, the Assembly distinguished between the
       “original corruption” conveyed to all humanity and the
       “actual transgressions” which “proceed” from that corruption.
       This original corruption includes four elements within the
       confession, namely that “we are utterly indisposed,”
       “disabled,” “made opposite to all good” and are “wholly
       inclined to all evil” (WCF 6.4). As part of our original
       corruption, the confession here distinguishes this
       “inclination” to evil from the “actual transgressions” that
       proceed from it.

       Of course, if the inclination to sin were itself “actual
       transgression,” then that would have applied to any potential
       sexual attraction to someone God has not given us, whether
       male or female. But the divines chose to categorize the
       inclination to sin as a facet of original corruption, and not as
       actual transgression. (We are morally culpable either way.) ...

       Here, the point would be that both the corruption and its
       promptings, proposals, or initiatives (its temptations) are truly
       and properly sin—and not merely human weakness, contrary
       to the Roman Church. As A.A. Hodge explains in his
       commentary on the chapter, “The great burden of pollution
       and guilt is felt to consist not in what we have done, but in
       what we are—our permanent moral condition rather than our
       actual transgressions.”

SJC 4. What does it mean to say that SSA is “of sin” but not “a sin”? Is
something that is merely “of sin” morally culpable before God?

       That is language I adopted from the 2017 Missouri Presbytery
       report on sexuality. The distinction is not between degrees of
       culpability, but between degrees of volition. We are culpable
       both for what we do (transgression) and also for what we are
       (any lack of conformity unto). Since sexual temptation (of any
       kind) arises from our own heart, we are always culpable.
       “Each one is tempted when, by his own evil desire, he is
       dragged away and enticed” (James 1:14). I use the phrase “a
       sin” in its vernacular sense as a synonym for “actual sin.”
       When speaking of the motions of original corruption, I am


                                     749
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        more likely to speak of “indwelling sin.” Temptations are “of
        sin” in that they are “motions of” original sin/internal
        corruption.

SJC 5. Do you have any disagreement with WCF 6.4, 6.5 or 6.6 in its
formulation and description of sin, actual or original? If so, identify any
differences in detail. 18

        I have no differences with the formulation in WCF 6.4, 6.5 or
        6.6. I have leaned heavily on these categories in my teaching
        on the topic of sexuality in recent years.

                                Allegation 2:
        “TE Johnson compromises and dishonors his identity in Christ
              by self-identifying as a same-sex-attracted man.”

Related to this allegation, Complainant contends the following:

        -    “When asked about the question of identity or self-
             conception (within the context of the 2019 GA
             affirmation of the Nashville Statement), TE Johnson side-
             stepped the question entirely (CRM Report, p. 26).”
             [ROC 5, line 157-158]

        -    “TE Johnson may not describe himself as a "gay
             Christian" personally and publicly, but he never declares
             such a self-designation to be wrong and contrary to God's
             Word. He refuses to do so, it seems. Why?” [ROC 6, line
             189-191]


18 WCF 6.4     From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed,
  disabled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed
  all actual transgressions.
  WCF 6.5 This corruption of nature, during this life, doth remain in those that are
  regenerated; and although it be, through Christ, pardoned, and subdued; yet both it,
  and all the motions thereof, are truly and properly sin.
  WCF 6.6 Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of the righteous
  law of God, and contrary thereunto, doth, in its own nature, bring guilt upon the
  sinner, whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse of the law, and so
  made subject to death, with all miseries spiritual, temporal, and eternal.


                                         750
                                  APPENDIX T



If the Record demonstrated that the above statements were an accurate
summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper to sustain the
Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it was not
unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not hold these
positions and that TE Johnson’s statements, responses, and explanations—
taken as a whole—do not undermine or contradict his identity as a new
creation in Christ.

Thus, for example, in responding to the Presbytery’s investigating committee,
TE Johnson stated the following:

    GJ:   I have avoided the couplet "gay Christian" because of its
          historical connection to the Gay Christian Network, an
          affirming group. Also, it's not my Christianity that's gay. It's
          my sexual orientation that is. ... For me, my fallen sexual
          orientation is not my identity. As I wrote in CT, "My sexual
          orientation doesn’t define me. It’s not the most important or
          most interesting thing about me.

    GJ:   If by identity, you mean the core identity that defines me,
          the identity that then becomes what I aspire more fully to
          be, then no Christian should have a fallen sexual orientation
          as their core identity. Our core identity as Christians is that
          we have been adopted as sons of Father into his family.
          That's the objective identity that names and claims me and
          to which I owe my life, my love and my treasure.

    GJ:   If a believer were celebrating their fallen sexuality, then
          there's obviously a problem with that.

    GJ:   [From an email to someone who posted a critique of
          Johnson’s Christianity Today testimony.] You express well
          how you cannot understand why anyone would celebrate a
          sin-identity as part of the Christian experience, and I agree.
          I have no interest in celebrating the sinful impulse of
          indwelling sin that so disorders my sexuality. I simply want
          to acknowledge that reality, not to celebrate it ...

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:


                                       751
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



SJC 6.a. Because “All saints, that are united to Jesus Christ their Head, by
his Spirit, and by faith, have fellowship with him in his graces, sufferings,
death, resurrection, and glory” (WCF 26.1) and all Christians have an
obligation to honor that union with the profession of our identity in Christ as
well as our obedience to him, have you compromised that profession by
changing your [previously expressed] view that Christians “ought to reckon
their identity, their conception of self, in a way that is indexed to the once-for-
all judgment Christ has executed against sin, the world and Satan in his death
and resurrection” (see ROC 827; 968, ln 9-12)?

        No. Jesus is everything to me. ... Every sermon I preach is a
        proclamation of the saving lordship of Jesus Christ and his
        calling to live out our new identity in him.

SJC 6.b. Have you changed your agreement with Statement 9 in the Ad Interim
Study Committee Report on Human Sexuality? If you have, present differences,
please explain them.

        I have no disagreement with Statement 9 of the Ad Interim
        Study Committee Report on Human Sexuality, provided that
        it is held alongside the other statements in the AIC report. ...
        In fact, I have no disagreement with the underlying
        theological or moral structure of the entire report. The
        concerns I will voice will be pastoral and missiological in
        nature.

SJC 6.c. Regardless of whether you agree with Complainant that the Bible
never describes believers with a sinful modifier, given your understanding of
Biblical emphases indicated in [the two questions] above, along with your own
testimony that serious misconceptions can occur with Christian’s unqualified
identification of themselves as “gay” or “SSA” or “homosexual,” do you
understand how you might avoid misunderstanding and bring peace to the
church by using wording such as that suggested by concerned brothers below
(1 Cor. 8:12-13)?

    E.g., # 1 “This does not mean that Christians do not continue to struggle
    with sin all their life long. It means that such a believer ought not consider
    himself a drunkard Christian or an adulterer Christian or a homosexual
    Christian but rather a Christian who struggles with the temptation to
    drunkenness, adultery, or homosexuality….” [emphasis added, ROC 576,
    ln 256ff.]
                                       752
                                 APPENDIX T




    E.g., #2 ‘'I’m a Christian fighting against sexual lust, or pride, or
    worshiping idols, or lying, or gossiping" (ROC 6, ln 181-2).

If you will not use such wording as suggested in these examples, please
explain why?

        I have never once described myself as a “gay Christian.” Even
        in my GA speech, I said, “I am still same-sex attracted.” And
        when speaking about myself, I have always qualified
        whatever term I have used. ... I have never spoken of my
        sexual orientation without also speaking of my agreement
        with biblical teaching and my commitment to walk with Jesus
        in celibacy. ...

        The AIC notes that the term may be used as “a factual
        observation about one’s experiences,” but that believers
        should be mindful that others may assume something more by
        the term (AIC 30, lines 4-5-8). But I want to be heard by my
        fathers and brothers. Some of my detractors have claimed I
        identify as a “gay Christian,” but they have never been able to
        quote me as such. It is a couplet I have not and do not use.
        Those who do use it have their reasons, and I do not judge
        them or quarrel over words. (We owe them the judgment of
        charity. Most are merely trying to say they are “gay” and they
        are “Christian.” They are not typically intending to modify
        “Christian” or promote some new form of Christianity that is
        “gay.”) Still, I have always avoided this couplet. ...

        My actual daily struggle with sexual temptation is no different
        from other Christian men. I look away when tempted. I don't
        take that second glance. I meet with an elder weekly for
        accountability. I avoid unmonitored internet connections. I
        invest in Christian friendships in which I am known. I have
        Covenant Eyes on my phone. That experience is required of
        any Christian man walking in repentance. Being same-sex
        attracted does not increase my struggle against sexual
        temptation, per se.

        Again, as the AIC on sexuality states,


                                     753
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                    “How then should we think of the language of sexual
                    orientation? Insofar as the term orientation is used
                    descriptively to articulate a particular set of
                    experiences, namely the persistent and predominant
                    sexual attractions of an individual, it can remain
                    useful as a way of classifying those experiences in
                    contrast to the experiences of the majority of other
                    people” (AIC p.30 line 41 – p.31 line 1).

                              Allegation 3
  “TE Johnson denies God's purpose and power to sanctify SSA believers
   by minimizing the pursuit of orientation change from homosexual to
                             heterosexual.”

Related to this allegation, Complainant contends the following. (See also the
discussion in Allegation 1.)

          -     The problem arises when those who claim that same-sex
                attraction is so strong, that it is such a significant part of
                their lives, that they find their identity in this disposition.
                Further, they claim that this one particular sin is the only
                one that cannot be changed through the process of
                sanctification.

If the Record demonstrated that the above statement, and those in Allegation
1, were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been
proper to sustain the Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds
that it was not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does
not hold these positions and that TE Johnson affirms the reality and hope of
progressive sanctification.

Thus, for example, in response to a question from the Presbytery’s
investigating committee, TE Johnson stated the following:

    GJ:       God can do anything. He can do miracles. But the normal
              pattern in this fallen world is that this is a lifelong struggle.
              I know I will be delivered from temptation when my Lord
              Jesus brings me to glory. I know of no promise in the Bible
              that believers will no longer experience temptation in this
              life. Read Paul in Romans 7. He was not delivered from
              temptation in this life. As the confession expresses so
                                           754
                                  APPENDIX T



          succinctly (WCF 6.5) “This corruption of nature, during this
          life, doth remain in those that are regenerated.” As Calvin
          explained in his discussion of Romans 6, “So long as you
          live, sin must needs be in your members. At least let it be
          deprived of mastery. Let not what it bids be done.” This
          also lines up with the experience of most believers who are
          same-sex-attracted.
                 Longtime Harvest USA director Tim Geiger has
          stated that he has also never seen same-sex attraction go
          away—in himself or anyone else. I suspect there are cases
          out there. But ordinarily this is a lifetime struggle.

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:

SJC 8.a. Because our Confession acknowledges that, though our
“sanctification is … yet imperfect in this life, there abiding still some remnants
of corruption in every part; whence ariseth a continual and irreconcilable
war” (WCF 13.2); “in which war, although the remaining corruption, for a
time, may much prevail; yet, through the continual supply of strength from the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ, the regenerate part doth overcome; and so, the
saints grow in grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of God” (WCF 13.3), do
you affirm that it is possible for God to reduce or eliminate same-sex attraction
from the inclinations and desires of a believer (see ROC, 943 ln 31ff.)?

        Yes, it is possible for God to reduce homoerotic temptation
        from the inclinations and desires of a believer. It is also
        possible for God to eliminate such temptations, although this
        has been much, much rarer in practice. ... I have known others
        like myself who, while still only ever distracted by the same
        sex, have found the frequency of these distractions has
        lessened through the decades. While that may be partly a
        function of aging, I would like to think progressive
        sanctification has played a role in this.

        But struggle against sexual temptation is typically lifelong,
        whatever one's orientation, especially with men. ...

        As the AIC Report on Sexuality explains:



                                       755
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                The error of some Christian approaches to same-sex
                sexual desire has been to tie faithfulness to the
                elimination of homosexual temptation (or even the
                development of heterosexual desire) as though if
                Christians really did enough therapy, had enough
                faith, or repented sufficiently, God would deliver
                them in some final and complete way, changing their
                orientation (AIC p.25, lines 11-14).

SJC 8.b. Do you affirm that it is proper to expect that “through the continual
supply of strength from the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, the regenerate part
doth overcome; and so, the saints grow in grace,” even if total elimination of
sinful inclinations is uncommon?”

        Yes, I affirm this. “And we all, with unveiled face, beholding
        the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same
        image from one degree of glory to another. For this comes
        from the Lord who is the Spirit” (2 Corinthians 3:18). This is
        a lifelong process. “Not that I have already obtained this or
        am already perfect, but I press on to make it my own, because
        Christ Jesus has made me his own” (Philippians 3:12).
         “It is God’s will that you should be sanctified,” scripture
        states (1 Thessalonians 4:3).

        Again, the degree of change has most often been less than we
        had hoped. I for example wanted a wife and children, but what
        I got instead was half a century of virginity and lots of spiritual
        children. I have grown in my love for Jesus, in prayer, in
        intimacy with God. My anger has turned to gentleness, my
        impatience to longsuffering, and my endless lust to mere
        distractions.

        I can affirm exactly what this passage states, and it has been
        my own experience, that the regenerate part is overcoming
        and I have grown in grace, though the total elimination of
        sinful inclinations has not occurred. I look forward to this in
        glory.

SJC 8.c. Do you affirm that the process of sanctification – even when
accompanied by many weaknesses and imperfections (WCF 16.5, 6), with the
Spirit and the flesh warring against one another until final glorification (WCF
                                       756
                                  APPENDIX T



13.2) – should give Christians biblical cause to “expect to see the regenerate
nature increasingly overcome the remaining corruption of the flesh, but this
progress will often be slow and uneven” (ROC 850 lines 26-27, from AIC
Statement 7).

        Yes, I affirm this. Jesus does change lives, and that change is
        progressive. ... Nothing I have stated has ever been intended
        to suggest otherwise. ... Spiritual growth is toward holiness,
        not necessarily toward heterosexuality. And progressive
        sanctification, while absolutely real, remains partial in this
        life. In his 1646 Mortification of Sin, John Owen cautions us,
        “To mortify a sin is not utterly to kill, root it out and destroy
        it, that it should have no more hold at all nor residence in our
        hearts…. This is not in this life to be accomplished. An utter
        killing and destruction of it … is not in this life to be
        expected.” Rather, Owen sees ongoing struggle as a means of
        God's ministry to us. “God, by our infirmity and weakness,
        keep[s] us in continual dependence on him for teaching and
        revelations of himself out of his word, never in this world
        bringing any soul to the utmost.” As WCF 6.5 states so
        succinctly, “This corruption of nature, during this life, doth
        remain in those that are regenerated.” If, as I have argued,
        same-sex attraction is part of our “original corruption”—
        specifically the part about being “inclined to all evil” (WCF
        6.4), then we should not be surprised to have to battle the
        motions of such underlying corruption until delivered into
        glory at death.

        The above quote from the AIC report continues with this same
        precise and necessary qualification.

                “Moreover, the process of mortification and
                vivification involves the whole person, not simply
                unwanted sexual desires. The aim of sanctification in
                one's sexual life cannot be reduced to attraction to
                persons of the opposite sex (though some persons
                may experience movement in this direction), but
                rather involves growing in grace and perfecting
                holiness in the fear of God.”



                                      757
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        Yes, sanctification is real and progressive, even while the
        flesh and Spirit continue their war. In this war, grace has the
        winning hand.

SJC 8.d. Do you affirm with our Confession that “they, who are once
effectually called, and regenerated, having a new heart, and a new spirit
created in them, are further sanctified, really and personally,” since the …
“dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof
are more and more weakened and mortified; and they more and more
quickened and strengthened in all saving graces to the practice of true
holiness” WCF 13.1”)
And do you by this affirmation, acknowledge that you will preach and teach
that Christians who struggle with SSA should believe that the dominion of sin
in their lives is broken, and that they can expect for the attraction to be
weakened and mortified as they are strengthened by the Word and Spirit in the
practice of true holiness?

        Yes. I do affirm with our Confession that “they, who are once
        effectually called, and regenerated, having a new heart, and a
        new spirit created in them, are further sanctified, really and
        personally,” since the … “dominion of the whole body of sin
        is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof are more and more
        weakened and mortified; and they more and more quickened
        and strengthened in all saving graces to the practice of true
        holiness.”

        All Christians should believe that the dominion of sin in their
        lives is broken, though it is the lusts that are weakened in
        WCF 13.1. Christians can expect for the lusts of the heart to
        be weakened and mortified as the believer is strengthened by
        the Word and Spirit in the practice of true holiness.

        Typically, a believer who is same-sex attracted can expect the
        same degree of freedom from sexual temptation that a straight
        believer can ordinarily expect through progressive
        sanctification. We are new creations in Christ. We are no
        longer slaves to sin that we must obey its commands. God will
        not allow us to be tempted beyond what we are able but will
        provide a way of escape. Jesus said we must pick up our cross
        daily and die. Without holiness, no one will see the Lord. A


                                     758
                                   APPENDIX T



        godly character is formed through decades of faithfulness and
        obedience.

        At the same time, again, the confession is nuanced, balancing
        these words with the qualification that “This sanctification is
        throughout, in the whole man; yet imperfect in this life, there
        abiding still some remnants of corruption in every part;
        whence ariseth a continual and irreconcilable war, the flesh
        lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh”
        (WCF 13.2). We must hold both of these realities or we leave
        the flock either enslaved by sin (on one side) or crushed by
        unrealistic and unbiblical expectations on the other.

        I know octogenarians who tell me they are still distracted
        when a beautiful woman walks in the room. But they have
        seen genuine increased freedom from the pull of sexual
        temptation, albeit less than they might have wanted or hoped
        for. John Murray—also a lifelong celibate until he married
        during his retirement at the age of sixty-nine—explained:
        “There is a total difference between surviving sin and reigning
        sin, the regenerate in conflict with sin and the unregenerate
        complacent with sin. . . . It is one thing for sin to live in us; it
        is another for us to live in sin.”

SJC 9. Do you affirm your agreement with the Statement #7 in the Report of
the Ad Interim Study Committee on Human Sexuality? If you have present
differences, please explain them.

        I think Statement 7 is beautifully written and well nuanced. I
        am in full agreement with it.

SJC 10. On ROC 943, in response to [MOP] Committee Question 5a, you
respond that delivery from same sex attraction would take a “miracle” and
that “the normal pattern in this fallen world is that this is a lifelong struggle.”
You then cite Paul’s statements in Romans 7 as evidence of this ongoing
struggle. But Paul also continually calls us not only to cease from sin, but to
live in accordance with God’s Law. For example, Ephesians 4:28 requires not
just avoiding theft (or temptations to steal) but a positive commitment to
“labor, doing honest work.” Similarly, Ephesians 5:4 does not call us only to
avoid filthy talk, but to speak “thanksgiving” (its opposite). More generally,
the Ten Commandments not only forbid sin, but enjoin righteousness. Do you
                                        759
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



believe it is (ordinarily, outside of a miracle) impossible to give up a proclivity
to murder? Theft? Lying? If not, how is it that same sex attraction is different
from all these other sins?

        When I state that “sexual orientation does not typically
        change,” I am not saying that God doesn't change lives. Look
        at TE Tim Geiger. Look at TE Allan Edwards. Look at RE
        Luke Calvin. Look at RE Jim Pocta. None of these brothers
        claims to have been freed from the presence of same-sex
        temptation. ... All of these are walking miracles and proof of
        the gospel's power to radically reorient a life to God. My point
        has been and remains that none of this is evidence of a gay-
        to-straight cure. ...

        Same-sex sexual attraction is very similar to opposite-sex
        sexual attraction. Opposite-sex sexual attraction for someone
        other than your spouse is also a motion of the corrupt nature
        tempting you to sin. As such, it too is properly called sin. That
        sexual pull toward your neighbor's wife is not morally neutral.
        It is sin to mortify.

        But it doesn't typically go away, either. It may be weakened,
        but it is rare that a Christian man does not feel sexual
        temptation. ...

        Just as we don't instruct believers attracted to the opposite sex
        to expect all sexual feelings to disappear, we cannot expect
        that of believers with same-sex attraction. The absence of
        temptation is not a standard that straight men have ever lived
        up to.

        The Bible does present to us a movement from sin to its
        opposite. But the opposite of homosexual sin is not
        heterosexual sin. The opposite is holiness. ...

        The AIC report suggests this physiological component by
        trying (sic) homosexual orientation not merely to
        original/indwelling sin, but also to our state of misery. “The
        origins and development of sexual desire remain complex
        and, in many ways, mysterious. It is possible to conceive of
        the experience of same-sex attraction as simultaneously a part
                                       760
                                      APPENDIX T



           of the remaining corruption of original sin as well as the
           misery of living in a fallen world, one of the ways our bodies
           themselves groan for redemption (Rom. 8:22-23; WCF 6.6;
           WLC 17-19)” (AIC p.28 line 5). Fallen biology may account
           for much of this reality. “However, we must also acknowledge
           … the ways in which the Fall has shaped our biological and
           social development” (AIC p.27, lines 37-39).

                                 Allegation 4
 “TE Johnson cannot meet the biblical ‘above reproach’ qualification for the
                                  eldership
  since (a) homosexual inclinations are sin proper and are more heinous for
       being ‘against nature,’ and since (b) TE Johnson identifies as a
                        homosexually-inclined man.”

If the Complainant had demonstrated, for example, that the minister was
involved in homosexual behavior, cultivated unrepentant lustings, taught that
either of those were not sinful, or was not continually seeking to mortify those
temptations, it would have been proper to sustain the Complaint. The Record
demonstrates it was not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE
Johnson pursues Spirit-empowered victory over his sinful temptations and
actions, just as another man must do with heterosexual temptations toward
someone not his wife.19

Thus, for example, in response to the Presbytery’s investigating committee,
TE Johnson stated the following:


19    At the Hearing, the Complainant indicated he questioned whether the ESV
     accurately translates 1 Cor. 6:9 when it uses the phrase, “men who practice
     homosexuality.” However, the footnote in the ESV indicates: “The two Greek terms
     translated by this phrase refer to the passive and active partners in consensual
     homosexual acts.”
        In the 48th GA’s AIC Report on Sexuality, footnote 4 for Statement 1 reads as
     follows: “Paul coined the term arsenokoitai (1 Cor. 6:9; 1 Tim. 1:10) from the use
     of two related terms in the Septuagint version of Leviticus 18 and 20. The basic
     meaning is “man-bedders” or men who have sex with other men. ... The combination
     of arsenokoitai and malakoi, uniquely used in the New Testament in 1 Corinthians
     6:9, likely refers most directly—as per the ESV footnote—to the active and passive
     partners in consensual homosexual activity. For more extended discussion, see
     Chapter 5 in Kevin DeYoung, What Does the Bible Really Say About
     Homosexuality? (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015).”

                                           761
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   GJ:   The 5th General Assembly of the PCA in 1977 declared that
         “a practicing homosexual continuing in this sin would not
         be a fit candidate for ordination or membership in the
         Presbyterian Church in America.” ... Within the PCA, the
         categories were “practicing homosexual” and “non-
         practicing homosexual.” Only the former category was
         barred from membership and ordained ministry.

   GJ:   So how do I view my orientation? Well, it's obviously
         fallen. No one ever had to convince me of that. ... This
         means that mortification of sexual sin has been a daily part
         of my Christian experience these last thirty years. That
         means fleeing temptation; I've never been able to join a gym
         or enter a locker room. That means redirecting thoughts.
         That means accountability. (I've met with an elder every
         Thursday for the past 18 years for prayer. He gets my
         Covenant Eyes report to help me stay faithful.)

   GJ:   I'm a sinner and so it feels wrong for me to appeal to any
         righteousness I may have. I’m a virgin who—as I said in my
         GA floor speech last year—mortifies my indwelling sin
         daily. But my sin is ever before me. I can mention the more
         than a decade since I've looked at porn, but I know Proverbs
         6:16-19. The point is that we don't judge based on what
         sinful temptation a minister experiences so much as what he
         does with that temptation. If a minister of the gospel
         faithfully mortifies his temptation toward gay sex or
         slander, developing over decades a character that
         consistently if imperfectly does what God wants (and not
         what indwelling sin wants), that is a character that others
         close to him will see as being above reproach. But the
         minister himself feels like a “wicked man” with no hope but
         in God's sovereign grace to “save me from this body of
         death.” ... [I]f a minister instead engages in more seriously,
         without particular repentance, they have no basis for an
         actual gay sex or actual slander, then Paul's logic would
         seem to indicate that such a minister is unfit for office. And
         much assurance of salvation.

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:
                                     762
                                  APPENDIX T




SJC 11. In light of the PCA's statements on homosexuality, Scripture, and the
Westminster Standards, how can a same-sex attracted/homosexual elder, who
is chaste, be considered above reproach?

        I don't see too much difference from how one ordinarily
        concludes that a minister is above reproach. It is not
        temptation that disqualifies a man—then we would all be
        disqualified. As Al Mohler writes, “Every single human being
        who has experienced puberty has a sexual orientation that, in
        some way, falls short of the glory of God.” It's a level field at
        the foot of the cross.

        What places a minister above reproach is the Lord's work in
        developing a Christian character trained through perseverance
        to trust and obey Jesus Christ in the face of temptation. That
        includes love for God, the pursuit of holiness, the practice of
        godliness, personal integrity, humility, self-sacrificial love for
        people, wise use of spiritual gifts, biblical and confessional
        orthodoxy and the approbation of God's people.

        I do experience same-sex temptation. (I call it same-sex
        distraction because I'm just trying to serve my Lord when it
        tries to distract me from that.) I know other pastors in this
        denomination that experience other temptations like the
        temptation to slander. Those who have gay sex and those who
        slander are both listed 1 Corinthians 6 among those who “will
        not inherit the kingdom.” The Hebrew scriptures similarly call
        gay sex an abomination to the LORD (Leviticus 18:22). The
        same scriptures call “spreading strife among brothers” an
        abomination to the LORD (Proverbs 6:16-19). There are
        additional sins that also get this same categorization.

        The point is that we don't judge by what sinful temptation a
        minister experiences in his heart so much as by what he does
        with that temptation. Does he proactively mortify his sin?

        If a minister of the gospel faithfully mortifies his temptation
        toward homoeroticism or slander (or lust, or anger, etc.),
        developing over decades a character that consistently if
        imperfectly does what God wants (and not what indwelling
                                       763
            MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



sin wants), that is a character that others close to him will see
as being above reproach.

I have been a leader in the same congregation for 27 years. I
am known. They view me as above reproach, as does the
presbytery in which I have been member these past 19 years—
and before that, an intern for about six years. They see all the
effort I put into honoring God with my sexuality. They know
how I see sin always crouching at my door, requiring me to
remain always prepared to battle it. They know I have never
been sexually active. I have never held hands, snuggled or
looked longingly into someone’s eyes. They know I have only
kissed once, and that was with a girl in high school before I
knew the Lord. They know I have not looked at porn in over
17 years. They know the same ruling elder and I have met for
coffee and to pray every Thursday morning for twenty years,
and that he gets my Covenant Eyes report. They know I never
go near a gym or locker room to avoid any potential
temptation or even distraction. They know how I proactively
work on having close, long-term Christian friendships in order
to proactively mortify the loneliness that might occasion
sexual temptation. They know how I respect men and women
as image bearers of God and live in joyful submission to my
savior Jesus Christ. They have seen all the fruit of the Spirit
in me. Those who know me honor God's work in my life and
see in it hope that the gospel truly has power to change us.
That is the approbation of God's people for a regenerate
sinner’s life lived in saving union with Jesus Christ in a way
that is above reproach. ...

The Presbyterian Church in America itself declared in 1977
only that “practicing homosexuals”—as distinct from non-
practicing homosexuals—were not suitable candidates for
ordination. Three years later, the 1980 RPCES report on
homosexuality specifically rejected any categorical exclusion
of “repentant homosexuals” from church office. This year's
AIC report states the same position, “Insofar as such persons
display the requisite Christian maturity, we do not consider
this sin struggle automatically to disqualify someone for
leadership in the church (1 Cor. 6:911, 1 Tim. 3:1-7, Titus 1:6-
9; 2 Pet. 1:3-11),” (AIC p. 31, lines 29-31).
                              764
                                 APPENDIX T



        Our AIC report on sexuality commends those of us who have
        persevered in the face of homoerotic temptation:

                Our brothers and sisters who resist and repent
                of enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are
                powerful examples to us all of what this ‘daily
                mortification’ looks like in ‘the best of
                believers.’ We should be encouraged and
                challenged by their example and eager to join
                in fellowship with them for the mutual
                strengthening of our faith, hope, and love.
                (AIC p.23, lines 30-33).

        The [AIC] report offers further commendation of those who
        model for the rest of the church what costly obedience looks
        like.

                Finally, we rejoice with our brothers and
                sisters who, while experiencing ongoing
                attraction to the same sex and living in a
                culture which would encourage them to
                embrace and act on those attractions, instead
                pursue lives of faithfulness through chastity
                and obedience to Christ by daily echoing
                Jesus’s words of “not my will, but yours, be
                done” with respect to their sexuality (Luke
                22:42). In this, they model for us all what it
                means to heed Jesus’ teaching: “If anyone
                would come after me, let him deny himself
                and take up his cross and follow me” (Mark
                8:34). May it be that thanks to the finished
                work of Christ, and at the end of our
                sometimes faltering and imperfect obedience,
                we each hear the divine accolade: “Well done,
                good and faithful servant.”

SJC 12. Is homosexuality a heinous sin? If so, why? If not, why not? (Please
support your answer from the Standards and interact with Larger Catechism
150-151)



                                     765
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         Sins are not all equally heinous (WLC 150). But they are all
        heinous. Having sex with someone of the same sex is very
        heinous. Before we ever get to the Standards, the Bible is clear
        on this point. For a man to lie with another man as one lies
        with a woman, it is an abomination. Paul picks up the Hebrew
        of Leviticus—arsenokoitai, literally “male bed”—to prohibit
        it in no uncertain terms as sin that that will keep a man out of
        the kingdom.

        A sin can be aggravated by any number of factors. Sexual
        immorality is a heinous sin. But the sin can be aggravated, for
        example, by that immorality being with another man's wife.
        Or with someone in our church, where we were in a position
        of spiritual leadership over them. Sexual immorality with
        someone of the same sex would be yet another aggravation. I
        do not see the list in WLC 151 as exhaustive.

        All other things being equal, I would consider homosexual
        immorality to be more heinous than heterosexual immorality
        on account of the way it further warps God's creational norm
        for sex. As in WLC 151, it goes against the “light of nature.”
        Romans 1 notes it is unnatural.

SJC 14. In your Revoice Breakout Session you said “And other people have a
calling to glorify God with unwanted same sex attraction or gender dysphoria
or intersex condition. And that calling, because it’s a calling from God to
suffer, is a holy calling and a holy vocation.” Further, you compare these
situations to one who is in an empty marriage and one who has leukemia.
(ROC 464). Whatever your answer, what is the Biblical or Confessional basis
for designating this as a calling or vocation?

       If I thought for a moment that my struggle with same-sex
      attraction was a random experience, bad luck, something
      outside of my heavenly Father's care, I would have no hope. It
      is because it is a calling from my Father that I can follow his
      wise instruction and trust and obey him through this calling. ...

      To be perfectly clear, I was not saying that sin is a holy calling,
      but that the life-long struggle against a particular indwelling sin
      on account of a fallen sexual orientation—and enduring the
      suffering that results from that—is a holy calling. I didn't have
                                      766
                                 APPENDIX T



      to spell that out because my audience were Christian leaders at
      a conference that for Christians who are same-sex attracted and
      committed to the biblical sexual ethic.

SJC 17. (#25 of the Questions the SJC sent down, because some of the
questions had multiple parts.) Do you think any of your public statements have
upset the peace of the PCA, and if so, do you have any thoughts on how you
might restore peace to our denomination?

      Certainly, in addition to what I mentioned above, there have
      been some posts or comments in social media that I regretted. I
      either deleted them and apologized, or I kept them up with an
      added apology and clarification. As I said above, I will continue
      to work with my presbytery in seeking their wisdom as to how
      and where I should issue further apologies and clarifications. I
      want nothing more than the purity and peace of the PCA.

Conclusion

         Based on the Record, there was no reversible error in the decisions
reached by Missouri Presbytery regarding the four allegations. It was not
unreasonable for Presbytery to judge that TE Johnson’s “explanations” on
the four allegations were “satisfactory.” (BCO 31-2).

        The SJC approved the decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Dissent        M. Duncan Dissent            Neikirk Concur
      Bise Dissent           S. Duncan Dissent            Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Concur                 Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur         Greco Dissent                Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur         Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur          Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur         Lucas Absent                 White Dissent
      Dowling Dissent        McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (16-7-0)




                                     767
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                Concurring Opinion
                               of RE Howie Donahoe

I concurred with the SJC Decision but believe comment is warranted in five
areas:
    1. The Judgment of Charity
    2. 1 Corinthians 6:9-11
    3. Complaints against Non-Indictments
    4. 47th GA’s AIC Report on Sexuality
    5. Reopening the Record

1. The Judgement of Charity - BCO 14-7 stipulates, “... Judicial decisions
... may be appealed to in subsequent similar cases as to any principle which
may have been decided.” In 2010, by a vote of 19-1 the SJC decided an
important principle when it denied a similar complaint against a non-
indictment. Here’s an excerpt from the SJC Reasoning.

                Complainants hold that certain views expressed by [the
           minister who was not indicted], capable of a heterodox
           interpretation, must be so interpreted. But this violates the
           judgment of charity, that if a view can be interpreted in an
           orthodox fashion, it ought to be so interpreted until one is
           forced to do otherwise.
                Complainants hold that certain of [the minister’s] views
           imply heterodox doctrines, and therefore impute those
           doctrines to [the minister]. But this is a non sequitur as well.
           One cannot properly impute implications that are drawn from
           a position to a person who expressly denies the implication.
           For example, a disciple of Gordon Clark believed that John
           Gerstner’s failure to embrace supralapsarianism implied
           Arminianism. He was free to so believe, but it was utterly
           unjust for him to say that Gerstner was an Arminian when
           Gerstner expressly denied it and spent his ministry upholding
           the sovereignty of grace in the Gospel.
                Against this doubtful reasoning stand [the minister’s]
           express, specific, and unambiguous denials of heterodoxy and
           affirmations of orthodoxy. The only question, then, is with
           respect to [the minister’s] credibility.20 (Emphasis added.)

20
     Case 2010-04: TE Sartorius et al. v. Siouxlands. (M39GA, 2011 Virginia Beach, pp.
     578-83) Nine current SJC members concurred: TEs Chapell, Coffin, Greco, McGowan,
     and REs Carrell, S. Duncan, Neikirk, Terrell and White. (TE Dominic Aquila was
                                          768
                                    APPENDIX T



In his Complaint and Briefs, the Complainant repeatedly alleges what he
contends TE Johnson believes, rather than providing reasonable-length quotes
from the accused to corroborate those contentions - especially when the
accused denies the implications the Complainant imputes. The Complaint
never quotes even one complete sentence of TE Johnson’s, and the 10-page
Preliminary Brief only quotes one complete sentence. This is quite stunning,
given that the accusations allege sinful views and statements. The
Complainant repeatedly makes assertions like, “Johnson believes ...,” and
“Johnson affirms ...,” without providing evidentiary excerpts.21 In the
concluding paragraph of his Preliminary Brief, the Complainant asks the SJC
to “find a strong presumption of guilt against TE Greg Johnson for his stated
views on human sexuality...” But instead of quoting examples of the allegedly
unbiblical stated views, the Complainant asserts what he contends are TE
Johnson’s views (occasionally providing some snippets from quotes) and then
argues why those constructions are problematic.

2. 1 Corinthians 6:9-11 - The Complainant seems to misinterpret or
   misapply this passage.
         9
           Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the
         kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually
         immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice
         homosexuality,10 nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards,
         nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God.
         11
           And such were some of you. But you were washed, you
         were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord
         Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God. (ESV. Emphasis
         added.)


   on the SJC at the time and concurred. In this present Case, he served as the
   Complainant’s assistant in the complaint against the non-indictment of TE Johnson.)
21
    from the Complaint: [Johnson allegedly] “maintains, believes, draws, misplaces,
   appears, consistently affirms.”
   Preliminary Brief: [Johnson allegedly] “maintains, defines, seems to say, is seeking
   to, appears to have, affirms, views, claims, draws, equates, treats, holds, teaches,
   promotes,” etc.
   Addendum Brief: [Johnson allegedly] “denies, appeals to, defines, explains, states,
   emphasizes, denies, contrasts, means, has adopted, expresses, sees, refuses,
   responds, suggests,” etc.



                                         769
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



While the original Complaint does not cite 1 Cor. 6:9-11, it is cited a dozen
times in the Complainant’s Briefs. Yet those verses never appear as citations
in the 12,000-word Westminster Confession of Faith.22

The SJC’s Reasoning on Allegation 4 (regarding the alleged failure to be
“above reproach”) includes the following footnote on 1 Cor. 6, which seems
to emphasize a distinction the Complaint does not grant.

           At the Hearing, the Complainant indicated he questioned
           whether the ESV accurately translates 1 Cor. 6:9 when it uses
           the phrase, “men who practice homosexuality.” However, the
           footnote in the ESV indicates: “The two Greek terms
           translated by this phrase refer to the passive and active
           partners in consensual homosexual acts.”
                 In the 47th GA’s AIC Report on Sexuality, footnote 4 for
           Statement 1 reads as follows: “Paul coined the term
           arsenokoitai (1 Cor. 6:9; 1 Tim. 1:10) from the use of two
           related terms in the Septuagint version of Leviticus 18 and 20.
           The basic meaning is “man-bedders” or men who have sex
           with other men. ... The combination of arsenokoitai and
           malakoi, uniquely used in the New Testament in 1 Corinthians
           6:9, likely refers most directly—as per the ESV footnote—to
           the active and passive partners in consensual homosexual
           activity. For more extended discussion, see Chapter 5 in
           Kevin DeYoung, What Does the Bible Really Say About
           Homosexuality? (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015).” (SJC
           Decision p. 23)

Contrast that to this excerpt from the Complainant’s Preliminary Brief, which
cites 1 Cor. 6:

           In contrast to those [non-sinful physiological] conditions,
           homosexuality is a violation of the seventh commandment and
           is always and only portrayed in Scripture as sinful (1 Cor. 6:9
           ...) ... [The Bible says] neither “effeminate, nor homosexuals…


22
      https://www.pcaac.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/WCFScriptureIndex.pdf Vs.
     10 is cited in part of LC 145, and vs. 11 in parts of LC 69, 75, 77, 161 & SC 32, but
     those parts don’t pertain much to assertions in the Complaint.


                                            770
                                 APPENDIX T



        will inherit the kingdom of God. Such were some of you”
        (1 Cor. 6:9-11, NASB).” (Brief, p. 6, lines 11 and 19.
        Emphasis added)

The Complainant does not seem to interpret 1 Cor. 6:9-11 as making any
significant distinction between unwanted homosexual temptations and
intentional homosexual lusts or actions.

Unwanted Temptations vs. Intentional Sinful Actions - Historically, whenever
the PCA has adopted statements related to homosexuality, it has always
expressed or at least clearly implied a significant distinction between unbidden
temptations and intentional sinful actions (lusting and behavior). Some
examples are shown below. These excerpts from GA statements or GA-
endorsed statements over the last four decades demonstrate it is tenuous for
anyone to maintain the PCA has changed its position on the important
distinction between unwanted temptations and intentional sinful thoughts and
actions. (Emphasis is added throughout.).

    1977 - Forty-four years ago, the 5th GA in Smyrna, GA adopted
    the following:

        That the 5th General Assembly of the PCA affirm the Biblical
        position for our denomination which states that: (1) The act
        of homosexuality is a sin according to God's Word; ... and (3)
        In light of the Biblical view of its sinfulness, a practicing
        homosexual continuing in this sin would not be a fit candidate
        for ordination or membership in the PCA. (M5GA, p. 67)

    1980 - Three years later, and two years before the RPCES joined the PCA,
    its study committee produced a report titled “Pastoral Care for the
    Repentant Homosexual,” and their Synod “commended [the paper] to
    sessions and congregations as an aid for their ministry to those struggling
    with homosexuality.” (158th GS Minutes, pp. 43-50). Below are excerpts.

        Romans 1:26 ff. zeroes in on homosexual practices as a major
        manifestation of sinful man’s attempt to distort the creator's
        intent. But homosexuality is not singled out as the worst of all
        manifestations of sin as we can see in Jesus’ indictment against
        the unbelief of Capernaum (Matt. 11:23). ...
             If he who once was involved in homosexuality is growing
        in grace to such an extent that he can “walk with exemplary
                                      771
               MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    piety before the flock” there ought not be any reason for a
    generalized exclusion from church office. Judgment must be
    made in individual cases by the session and/or presbytery,
    keeping in mind those aggravations that make some sins more
    heinous than others.

1993 - Twenty-eight years ago, the 21st GA in Columbia, SC adopted
Overture 16 from Potomac Presbytery and sent a letter to the US President,
titled, “Declaration of Conscience.” Below are excerpts. Note the repeated
use of the words “practice” or “behavior.”

    [W]e stand resolutely opposed to homosexual practice as
    incompatible with the temporal good of our nation and the
    eternal good of its people. ... Our categorical rejection of
    homosexual behavior as wrong and destructive cannot fairly
    be taken to mean that we have not extended ourselves or are
    unable to extend ourselves in compassion and courage to men
    and women in our society who are homosexual. ... Our
    American civil government has historically respected the
    family's primacy in such matters and has sought to nurture it.
    Any policy which legitimizes homosexual practice abandons
    this time-honored tradition. To conclude, while condemning
    homosexual practice, we affirm our duty to love and do good
    to all, even those who are pursuing this perversion. ... More
    profoundly, however, the truth is that those given over to
    homosexual practice will face the judgment of God. ... Our
    prayer is that you will stand against any and every pressure
    that would be brought to bear on your Administration by those
    who would legitimize homosexual practices. (M21GA, p. 129)

1996 - Three years later, a personal resolution to "Oppose Legalization of
Homosexual Marriages" was answered by the 24th GA in Ft. Lauderdale
“by (1) reference to previous actions of the General Assembly (e.g.,
M5GA, p. 67-8, M21GA, p.129 ff.) and (2) the following statement:

    We affirm the Bible's teaching that promotion of homosexual
    conduct and relationships by any society, including action by
    the governments to sanction and legitimize homosexual
    relationships by the legalization of homosexual marriages, is
    an abominable sin calling for God's judgment upon any such
    society (Lev. 18:22 and Rom. 1:18-32). ... (M24GA, p. 315)
                                 772
                                   APPENDIX T



      2021 - This year, at the 48th GA in St. Louis, the Overtures Committee
      voted 124-3 to recommend the GA “declare the Report of the Ad Interim
      Committee on Human Sexuality as a biblically faithful declaration and
      refer it to the Committee on Discipleship Ministries for inclusion and
      promotion among denominational teaching materials.” The GA adopted
      that recommendation by a large majority. Below are three examples of
      excerpts from the AIC Report pertaining to the difference between
      unwanted temptations and intentional sinful actions.
          Nevertheless, there is an important degree of moral difference
          between temptation to sin and giving in to sin, even when the
          temptation is itself an expressing of indwelling sin. While our
          goal is the weakening and lessening of internal temptations to sin,
          Christians should feel their greatest responsibility not for the fact
          that such temptations occur but for thoroughly and immediately
          fleeing and resisting the temptations when they arise. (Statement
          6 on Temptation, p. 9)

          We give thanks for penitent believers who, though they continue
          to struggle with same-sex attraction, are living lives of chastity
          and obedience. These brothers and sisters can serve as
          courageous examples of faith and faithfulness, as they pursue
          Christ with a long obedience in gospel dependence. (Statement
          12 on Repentance and Hope, p. 13)

          To feel a sinfully disordered sexual attraction (of any kind) is
          properly to be called sin—and all sin, “both original and actual”
          earns God’s wrath (WCF 6.6)—but it is significantly less heinous
          (using the language of the WLC 151) than any level of acting
          upon it in thought or deed. ... Our brothers and sisters who resist
          and repent of enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are
          powerful examples to us all of what this “daily mortification”
          looks like in “the best of believers.” We should be encouraged
          and challenged by their example and eager to join in fellowship
          with them for the mutual strengthening of our faith, hope, and
          love. (Essay on Confessional Foundations, p. 23) 23

Righteous v. Unrighteous Standing - In addition to the above, it is difficult to
see how 1 Cor. 6:9-11 has much application to the allegations in this Case. The

23
       PCA Statements at https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/studies/index.htmland
     bibliography of the AIC Report (p.48).

                                        773
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



main point of the passage is that, because of God’s act in regeneration and his
imputation of the justifying righteousness of Christ, the Corinthian believers
were no longer, in any sense, the unrighteous who will not enter the kingdom
of God. (See the comments in the ESV Study Bible on verse 11 summarizing
the objective realities of regeneration and faith.)

When Paul says in vs. 11, “And such were some of you,” he is not saying the
Corinthians no longer experience any of those temptations or might even
commit those sins. The passage is not addressing that question, at least not
directly. He is simply saying these sanctified and justified Corinthians were
once the unrighteous-who-will-not-inherit but are now the righteous-in-Christ-
who-will-inherit.

At the same time, it would be reasonable to think Paul expected that some of
the Corinthians Christians were still tempted to the sins described in vv. 9-10
and was at least implicitly warning them, and all Christians, to avoid a lifestyle
that could fairly be described in the terms of vv. 9-10. But here we’d need to
distinguish, say, between a greedy person—whose life is characterized by
unrepentant greedy lusts and greedy behavior—and a person who is tempted
to greedy thoughts but seeks to flee from them and repents of any greedy
thoughts and deeds soon thereafter. There is an important difference between
a man whose life is characterized by unrepentant and willful reviling speech
and a man who sometimes succumbs to the temptation to revile but repents
soon thereafter. Paul is not teaching that people who were once characterized
by reviling speech will never again speak in that way. Any fears or warnings
in this passage are predicated upon his clear statement about who all of them
are presently in Christ.24

3. Complaints Against Non-Indictments - Complaints against non-
indictments like this one pose many complications, and this is rarely the most
prudent course for an accuser who claims a person should be indicted. This
point was made 12 years ago in a Concurring Opinion joined by RE Sam

24
      In the AIC Report, the first section of the Bibliography was titled, “For Pastors and
     Sessions” and the AIC reported these were books that could “help pastors and
     sessions shepherd congregants who are dealing with same-sex attraction.” Each of
     the 12 books note a significant difference between a person whose life is
     characterized by sinful homosexual lusts and behavior and a person who is tempted
     to homosexual thoughts but seeks to flee from such thoughts and repents of any to
     which he succumbs. That is a distinction in 1 Cor. 6:9-11 that the Complaint does
     not seem to sufficiently recognize.

                                             774
                                     APPENDIX T



Duncan and TE Fred Greco in the Siouxlands Case mentioned on page 1.
Below are excerpts from that Concurrence.

                This Case ... demonstrates the difficulty a Higher Court
           faces when presented with a Complaint, which contends that a
           Lower Court erred in not finding a strong presumption of guilt
           pursuant to an investigation (BCO 31-2). ...
                We suggest that instead of filing a Complaint for the failure
           of a Court to find a strong presumption of guilt after a BCO 31-
           2 investigation, a clearer and better alternative is to commence
           the process under BCO 32-2, i.e., “[p]rocess against an
           offender shall not be commenced unless some person or
           persons undertake to make out the charge.”
                [W]e suggest that the better way in this Case, and other
           Cases where the views, beliefs, and practices of men are called
           into question, would be for the Party who is concerned about
           these views, beliefs, and practices to make such inquiries as are
           necessary and practical (cf. Matthew 18:15) to ascertain
           exactly what these views, beliefs, and practices are; then,
           assuming they are contrary to Scripture or our Constitution,
           formally file a “charge” pursuant to BCO 32-2 and 32-3. This
           procedure not only removes the question of whether a strong
           presumption of guilt exists (BCO 31-2), but also allows a Court
           to directly try the issue raised in the “charge.” (BCO 32-3)

Voluntary Prosecutors - I wasn’t on the SJC for the Siouxlands Case
referenced above, but I can agree with the excerpt from the Concurrence - to a
point. Deciding whether a matter warrants a trial should remain a matter of
discretion and judgment for the original court, and it shouldn’t be required to
indict a person every time someone “formally files a charge.” 25 Nevertheless,
in situations like the one described in the Duncan/Greco Concurrence, if a trial
is deemed the wisest course, the court should seriously consider appointing the
accuser as the “voluntary prosecutor” and placing the burden and
responsibility on him to prepare and prosecute the case, especially if it involves
one minister accusing another minister of theological error.


25
     See the Reasoning provided ten years ago in Overture 15 from Pacific NW
     Presbytery: “Amend 31-2 to Clarify What Needs to Be Investigated.” (M40GA,
     Louisville 2012, pp. 698-704)


                                         775
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         BCO 31-3. The original and only parties in a case of process
         are the accuser and the accused. The accuser is always the
         Presbyterian Church in America, whose honor and purity are
         to be maintained. The prosecutor, whether voluntary or
         appointed, is always the representative of the Church, and as
         such has all its rights in the case.

Very few presbyteries have experienced prosecutors, and if they do, it’s
unlikely he has hundreds of voluntary man-hours to dedicate to the task. It
would seem unfair in many instances for an accuser to expect someone else to
spend hundreds of hours preparing and prosecuting the accuser’s allegations.

Furthermore, there seems to be no jeopardy for someone who unsuccessfully
files a complaint against a non-indictment. Our present Case has consumed
thousands of man-hours at various levels in PCA courts (not to mention some
division and relational strain amongst brothers). What would dissuade others
from doing the same thing again in other situations? But if an accuser is made
the prosecutor, and fails to prove the offense at trial, he risks being censured.

         BCO 31-9. Every voluntary prosecutor shall be previously
         warned, that if he fail to show probable cause of the charges,
         he may himself be censured as a slanderer of the brethren.

So, in situations where someone very publicly accuses another person of sin,
and the accusation, if proven, would be sufficient to warrant a censure greater
than admonition, perhaps the first thing the court should say to the accuser is,
“Call your first witness.” 26 27

Problem with Amends - An additional problem with a complaint against a non-
indictment involves the limited and rather awkward remedies available to the
higher court in such cases. Below is the amends section of the BCO Chapter
on Complaints.


26
   A similar thing happened three years ago in Case 2016-11 Complaint of TE Michael
   Frazier v. Nashville, where the SJC unanimously denied a complaint against a non-
   indictment, but only after the Presbytery and the SJC had spent hundreds of man-
   hours on the Case. (M46GA, 2018 Atlanta, p. 500 ff.).
27
   We note that in a presbytery trial, BCO 31-2 presently requires the prosecutor to be
   a member of that court, but in judicial process before a session, the prosecutor can
   be any member of that church.

                                         776
                                     APPENDIX T



         BCO 43-10. The higher court has power, in its discretion, to
         annul the whole or any part of the action of a lower court
         against which complaint has been made, or to send the matter
         back to the lower court with instructions for a new hearing. If
         the higher court rules a lower court erred by not indicting
         someone, and the lower court refers the matter back to the
         higher court, it shall accept the reference if it is a doctrinal
         case or case of public scandal (see BCO 41-3).

If a higher court rules that a lower court erred by not indicting someone, and
remands it “with instructions for a new hearing,” it’s not reasonable to expect
the lower court to reverse itself and indict the person when the lower court was
nearly unanimous in the original non-indictment decision.28 Likewise, even if
the lower court subsequently conducts a trial, it’s not reasonable to expect a
conviction, absent some compelling new evidence or testimony.29

Assumption of Original Jurisdiction - A better solution might be a revision of
BCO 34-1. A revision like the one below might end the interpretive debates
on two parts of the current provision - “refuses to act” and “doctrinal cases or
cases of public scandal.” It would remove subjectivity.

         Possible Revision of 34-1. Process against a minister shall be
         entered before the Presbytery of which he is a member.
         However, if the Presbytery refuses to act in doctrinal cases or
         cases of public scandal and two if twenty-five percent (25%)
         of the other Presbyteries request the General Assembly to
         assume original jurisdiction (to first receive and initially hear
         and determine), the General Assembly shall do so.

Because such a revision would require the GA to wrest jurisdiction from the
presbytery regardless of what the presbytery may have done or decided, the
petitioning threshold would need to be appropriately high. For example, if it
were only 10% then merely 9 of 88 presbyteries could trigger it, and it might
become an annual event. The SJC is not designed to conduct investigations
and trials annually, nor would that be healthy for the denomination. If another
28
   Missouri’s votes declining to find strong presumption of guilt on the four charges
   were 44-1, 43-1, 41-2 and 41-6.
29
   See the SJC Decisions in Case 2009-06 Bordwine v. Pacific NW (a complaint against
   a non-indictment that the SJC sustained), and Case 2012-05 Hedman v. Pacific NW
   (a complaint against the subsequent trial acquittal - a complaint the SJC denied by a
   15-2 vote). (M38GA, 2010, pp. 208 ff. and M41GA, 2013, pp. 583 ff.)
                                          777
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



presbytery’s handling of allegations is so egregious and unreasonable, we
should expect at least 25% of the presbyteries (22 of 88) to send a simple, one-
sentence email to the PCA Stated Clerk saying: “In accord with BCO 34-1,
our Presbytery requests the GA (through its SJC) to assume original
jurisdiction over TE ___ on matters related to ____.” If there aren’t 22
presbyteries that believe this rare and extreme step should be taken, then the
PCA is evidently not sufficiently concerned to warrant wresting jurisdiction
away from a presbytery.

Thus, the 25% threshold seems a reasonable one. It’s not too high to be
unattainable and not too low to be prone to abuse, and it would likely be
acceptable to two-thirds of our presbyteries (though some would prefer it
lower, and some would prefer it higher.) 30

4. Excerpts from AIC Report on Sexuality - To support some of his
assertions, the Complainant cites excerpts from the 2020 AIC Report. TE
Johnson also provides AIC excerpts in support of some of his explanations and
answers. The Complainant usually cites from the first sections of the “Twelve
Statements” and TE Johnson often cites from the second sections, i.e., the
“Nevertheless” sections. 31

Below are excerpts from the AIC Report that closely pertain to the subject
matter of the four allegations, which seem to harmonize with TE Johnson’s
explanations and answers. While nothing from the AIC Report was proposed
for GA adoption, the 2021 GA in St. Louis, by an overwhelming majority,
judged it to be a “biblically faithful declaration” and commended it to
Presbyteries and Sessions.

         Statement 6 (Temptation) ... Nevertheless ... We can avoid
         “entering into” temptation by refusing to internally ponder and
         entertain the proposal and desire to actual sin. Without some
         distinction between (1) the illicit temptations that arise in us
30
   The author of this Concurrence has twice drafted Overtures proposing revisions to
   BCO 34-1, in 2009 and 2012, but both were unsuccessful. For a comprehensive
   Legislative and Judicial History of BCO 34-1, see this link to Google Drive:
   https://drive.google.com/file/d/1UfhfQLFmtvuaWyYADQmgZafv2RMQUWps/vi
   ew
31
   The Record contains this statement from TE Johnson: “... I have no disagreement
    with the underlying theological or moral structure of the entire [AIC] report. The
    concerns I will voice will be pastoral and missiological in nature.” (Response to
    SJC Question 6.b in Allegation 2. See also SJC Questions 6c, 8a, 8c, 10 and 11.)
                                         778
                          APPENDIX T



due to original sin and (2) the willful giving over to actual sin,
Christians will be too discouraged to “make every effort” at
growth in godliness and will feel like failures in their necessary
efforts to be holy as God is holy (2 Peter 1:5-7; 1 Peter 1:14-
16). God is pleased with our sincere obedience, even though it
may be accompanied with many weaknesses and imperfections
(WCF 16.6). (Report p. 9)

Statement 7 (Sanctification) ... Nevertheless ... The aim of
sanctification in one's sexual life cannot be reduced to
attraction to persons of the opposite sex (though some persons
may experience movement in this direction), but rather
involves growing in grace and perfecting holiness in the fear
of God (WCF 13.3). (p. 10)

Statement 9 (Identity) Nevertheless ... There is a difference
between speaking about a phenomenological facet of a
person’s sin-stained reality and employing the language of
sinful desires as a personal identity marker. That is, we name
our sins, but are not named by them. (p. 11)

Statement 10 (Language) ... Nevertheless, we recognize that
some Christians may use the term “gay” in an effort to be more
readily understood by non-Christians. The word “gay” is
common in our culture, and we do not think it wise for
churches to police every use of the term. Our burden is that we
do not justify our sin struggles by affixing them to our identity
as Christians. Churches should be gentle, patient, and
intentional with believers who call themselves “gay
Christians,” encouraging them, as part of the process of
sanctification, to leave behind identification language rooted
in sinful desires, to live chaste lives, to refrain from entering
into temptation, and to mortify their sinful desires. (p. 12)

Essay 1: Confessional Foundations Regarding Nature of
Temptation, Sin and Repentance

    II.B.1. The Common Dynamic of Concupiscence - First,
    the dynamic of spontaneous sinful desire or attraction is
    not unique to those who experience homosexual desire. All
    people experience it. It is an essential point in the
                              779
       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Confession that all of us who are descended from Adam
and Eve experience their corrupted nature and the complex
of disordered affections, desires, and attractions that come
with that corruption. The danger of this question arising in
the context of the discussion of homosexuality is that some
might be tempted to think of that particular example of
disordered desire as qualitatively different from their own.
Or worse, some may be willing to assert the sinfulness of
one category of spontaneous desire but minimize or remain
largely ignorant of the sinful concupiscence that is
common to all.
    The truth is that if we think humbly and carefully about
our own spontaneous thoughts, feelings, and desires, we
would recognize that we are all much more alike than
different. ... Good Reformed teaching on sin places us all
on equal footing in our need of Christ’s imputed
righteousness. (p. 21)

II.B.2. Continued Corruption - Second, according to the
system of the Westminster Confession of Faith, we should
not be surprised, but rather expect that concupiscence in
general, and specific instances like homosexual attraction,
would continue in the life of a believer. ... This
acknowledgement of the remnants of corruption in
believers does not negate the call to fight against that
corruption; our endeavor to oppose and put to death what
is earthly in us (Col.3:5) demands a commitment to fight
all of our sin. However, to teach that our sinful corruption
must be entirely removed from any part of us in order to
be considered truly repentant is a spiritually treacherous
perversion of the doctrine of repentance. (p. 21)

II.B.5. Moral Difference - Finally, we can discern a very
practical value to the distinction between the sin that is
constituted by our “corruption of nature…and all the
motions thereof” and the “actual transgressions” that
proceed from it. ... To feel a sinfully disordered sexual
attraction (of any kind) is properly to be called sin—and
all sin, “both original and actual” earns God’s wrath (WCF
6.6)—but it is significantly less heinous (using the
language of the WLC 151) than any level of acting upon it
in thought or deed. ...
                         780
                                     APPENDIX T



                    Our brothers and sisters who resist and repent of
               enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are powerful
               examples to us all of what this “daily mortification” looks
               like in “the best of believers.” We should be encouraged
               and challenged by their example and eager to join in
               fellowship with them for the mutual strengthening of our
               faith, hope, and love. (p. 23)

           Essay 2: Biblical Perspectives for Pastoral Care - Discipleship,
           Identity and Terminology

               How then should we think of the language of sexual
               orientation? Insofar as the term orientation is used
               descriptively to articulate a particular set of experiences,
               namely the persistent and predominant sexual attractions
               of an individual, it can remain useful as a way of
               classifying those experiences in contrast to the experiences
               of the majority of other people. However, insofar as the
               term orientation carries with it a set of assumptions about
               the nature of that experience that is unbiblical (e.g.,
               overemphasized rigidity, its normativity, etc.), then the
               terminology may require qualification or even rejection in
               some circumstances. (p. 30)

               Singleness, Friendship, Community - Insofar as such
               persons display the requisite Christian maturity, we do not
               consider this sin struggle automatically to disqualify
               someone for leadership in the church (1 Cor 6:9-11, 1 Tim
               3:1-7, Titus 1:6-9; 2 Pet 1:3-11) (p. 31) 32

5. Reopening the Record - For two reasons, I abstained from the SJC’s
March 25, 2021, post-Hearing vote to consider reopening the Record and
sending 25 questions to Missouri. First, I judged that the Record already
demonstrated sufficiently that Missouri had not clearly erred in its decisions
declining to indict. But I also abstained because the proposal seemed to
resemble a quasi-assumption-of-original-jurisdiction and the post-assumption
investigatory step of SJC Manual 16.1.a. I’m confidently hopeful this
procedure won’t become a common occurrence.


32
     The AIC Report is at https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-
      48th-GA-5-28-20-1.pdf

                                          781
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Regardless, I think it should be clear to the impartial reader that the views
expressed in the accused minister’s answers to the SJC questions are not
fundamentally different from the views expressed in his answers to the
questions posed by Missouri’s investigating committee. And it’s worth noting
that the accused minister was under no constitutional obligation to answer any
of the questions. (BCO 35-1) In addition, it seems unreasonable for anyone to
object to the SJC question-sending if they also supported the BCO 34-1
assumption-of-original-jurisdiction petitions from Central Georgia, Savannah
River, and SE Alabama, which asked the SJC to institute a process that most
likely would begin with similar interrogatories — but ones drafted by a smaller
three-judge SJC Panel whose members would have been drawn by lot.
(OMSJC 16.1.a and RAO 17.3)

Moreover, the process by which the questions were selected was prudent and
fair. The Minutes of the SJC’s meeting on April 30, 2021, record: “The
Commission expressed its gratitude to the Committee members (Waters,
Donahoe, Dowling, Bise, Chapell, Kooistra) for their thorough and meticulous
work in compiling, refining and reporting the questions and recommendations.”
I’m confident the six-judge Committee would have included additional
questions above the 25 if any of the six members had said it was important to
them. Likewise, I’m confident the SJC would have included additional
questions if any SJC member had said it was important to them as well.
Finally, in my opinion it would be inaccurate to interpret the vote to send
questions to Missouri to mean that the SJC majority had concerns about how
Missouri conducted its investigation. On the contrary, in judging Issue 1 in this
Case, the SJC explicitly ruled Missouri did not violate BCO 31-2 in the manner
of its investigation of the allegations.33


33
     The SJC questioning in this Case was a slightly different procedure than in a similar
      one in June 2015. In Case 2014-01: TEs Aven & Dively v. Ohio Valley, the SJC
      ruled by a vote of 15-0: “The Complaint is neither Sustained nor Denied. The
      Commission cannot render judgment because the Record is insufficient regarding
      this minister’s particular expression of his view. Therefore, the Commission sends
      the matter back to OVP to hear further from [the minister] regarding his stated
      difference in order to create a more comprehensive Record.” The SJC supplied
      questions. (M44GA, 2016, p. 499). Sixteen months later, the SJC denied a follow-
      on complaint in Case 2016-01: Aven v. Ohio Valley, stating the following Issue and
      Judgment: “Did Presbytery fail to comply with the directive from the SJC’s
      Decision in Case 2014-01 to “hear further” from the minister regarding his view?
      No.” (M45GA, 2017, p. 496) The SJC judged that TE Aven had not complained
      against the answers provided in the accused minister’s nine-page document, which
      responded to the SJC-suggested questions.

                                            782
                                  APPENDIX T



TE David Coffin joins in Parts 1, 2 and 4 of the above concurring opinion.


                        Concurring Opinion of
                RE Frederick Neikirk and TE Guy Waters

While we concur with the decision of the Standing Judicial Commission in
case 2020-12, we feel compelled to offer the following additional comments,
both by way of clarification and explanation. Our comments fall into three
sections: why we could not conclude that Missouri Presbytery should have
found that there was a “strong presumption of guilt” regarding TE Johnson;
concerns regarding the use of BCO 31-2 to address alleged doctrinal errors;
and ongoing concerns about some of TE Johnson’s views.

I. Why We Could Not Conclude that Missouri Presbytery Should Have
   Found a “Strong Presumption of Guilt”

The SJC’s decision in this case should not be read as a defense or affirmation
of every statement or even every particular view of TE Johnson. That is not
the role of the appellate court, particularly in a case arising out of a complaint
that Presbytery failed to proceed to an indictment following a BCO 31-2
investigation. Further, we want to underscore, at the outset of our Concurring
Opinion, the structure and conclusions of the SJC’s Opinion. That opinion
repeatedly states that if the statements alleged in the Complaint were an
accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, then the Complaint would need to
be sustained. The SJC found, however, based on the Record, that it was “not
unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not hold these
positions.” As a result, the SJC could not sustain the Complaint.

We wish to elaborate on that conclusion. For this Complaint to be sustained
there would have had to have been a finding either that Presbytery somehow
failed properly to conduct the BCO 31-2 investigation or that said investigation
demonstrated “a strong presumption of guilt” but that Presbytery failed to take
the next step by indicting TE Johnson.

The BCO does not specify any particular set of procedures that a court must
follow in conducting a 31-2 investigation. Thus, lower courts have a great deal
of latitude in how they proceed in this area. While we are not persuaded that
the production of a large Record (over a thousand pages) is necessarily
evidence that the lower court has done a good investigation, and while we
might have wished that Presbytery had delved more deeply into some of TE

                                       783
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Johnson’s views, we cannot say that the Record demonstrates that Presbytery
committed any “clear error” (BCO 39-3(2,3)) in how it conducted its
investigation.

Of greater import here is how we are to understand “strong presumption of
guilt.” Aside from minor stylistic changes, the language of BCO 31-2 dates
back to the PCUS Book of Church Order of 1879. In discussing this provision
in his 1898 work Exposition of the Book of Church Order, F.P. Ramsay offers
this explanation of “strong presumption of guilt”: “A strong presumption
means a belief by the members of the court that evidence as then known to
them would indicate that guilt probably exists, unless evidence to the contrary
can be produced not then known to them.”34 In other words, to conclude that
Missouri Presbytery erred, one would have to show that there is evidence in
the Record that would demonstrate that it is likely that TE Johnson would be
convicted at a trial unless new, exculpatory evidence were provided. We agree
that the material provided in the Record does not meet this test.

As the SJC’s opinion demonstrates, some of the problematic comments that
TE Johnson had made were subsequently clarified or qualified (see below our
discussion in Part III). Further, in several cases, views that Complainant
alleged TE Johnson to hold were not supported by the Record. In particular,
there is no evidence in the Record that TE Johnson has made some of the
statements that Complainant found most problematic, and, in some instances,
the Record shows that TE Johnson explicitly denies ever having made the
comments (e.g., he avows that he does not use and has not used the “couplet”
“gay Christian” to identify himself). (ROC 975, 1029; SJC Opinion 18).
Additionally, in some cases the allegations Complainant raised about TE
Johnson’s views were apparently based on implications Complainant argued
must underlie or follow from things TE Johnson has said or not said. This was
particularly evident when the Complainant argued that TE Johnson’s failure to
answer adequately (in the view of the Complainant) a question about identity
must mean that TE Johnson does not recognize his identity as being in Christ
(ROC 5-6). It was also evident in Complainant’s conclusion that TE Johnson’s
cancer analogy (which we agree was ill-chosen) must mean that TE Johnson
believes same-sex attraction is genetic and ordinarily as incurable as cancer
34
     For the history of BCO 31-2 see the relevant section of the PCA Historical Center’s
     The Historical Development of the Book of Church Order, available at
     https://www.pcahistory.org/bco/rod/31/02.html. The Ramsay quote is included in
     that section. It is originally from F(ranklin) P(ierce) Ramsay, An Exposition of the
     Form of Government and Rules of Discipline of the Presbyterian Church in the
     United States (Richmond, VA: Presbyterian Committee of Publications, 1898), 187.
                                            784
                                    APPENDIX T



which must lead, in turn, to “the inexorable conclusion that someone who is
same-sex attracted is not responsible for his genetic condition” (ROC 3). By
any reasonable understanding of an appropriate judgment of charity we cannot
impute to a speaker implications that he denies unless there is no other
reasonable understanding of the statements in question, and this is particularly
true here given that the Record shows that TE Johnson denies the conclusions
Complainant drew (SJC Opinion 14-15).35

All this is not to say that we do not have ongoing concerns with some of TE
Johnson’s views and formulations. We do (see Part III). Indeed, Missouri
Presbytery recognized that, at a minimum, TE Johnson has not always been as
careful as he needed to be in how he has expressed some of his views (ROC
1003, 1004), and we agree with that assessment. But, having concerns about
a man’s views is very different from a conclusion that there is a “strong
presumption of guilt,” and that Presbytery erred by not reaching that
conclusion and thus in not proceeding to indict TE Johnson. Our concerns
notwithstanding, we cannot conclude that Presbytery should have found, from
the Record (which is all we are allowed to consider in reviewing a Complaint
(RAO 17.1(4)), that TE Johnson would likely have been convicted had a trial
been held before an impartial presbytery.

II Concerns Regarding the Use of BCO 31-2 to Address Alleged
Doctrinal Errors

In recent years we have seen several instances of efforts to use BCO 31-2 to
address alleged doctrinal errors. By its very nature a 31-2 investigation is
unlikely to develop a complete, fully documented Record. That, in turn, makes
review by a higher court difficult, particularly in doctrinal matters. This case
illustrates some of those difficulties.36

35
    The SJC has previously underscored the importance of applying a reasonable
   judgment of charity when drawing conclusions based on implications that one might
   conclude follow from an individual’s statements. See Case 2010-04: TE Art
   Sartorius et al. v. Siouxlands Presbytery (M39GA, 2011, pp. 578-83), esp. p. 582.
36
   We recognize that Allegations 2 and 4 in the Complaint focused, at least in large
   part, on TE Johnson’s fitness for office (character) given his admission that he is
   tempted by same sex attraction. We leave it to the Opinion of the SJC and the
   Report of the PCA General Assembly’s Ad Interim Committee on
   Human Sexuality to address the question of whether one tempted by (but not
   acting on) same sex attraction is automatically disqualified from office in the
   PCA. Our concern here is to highlight the problems of seeking to address the
   related doctrinal issues via the 31-2 process.

                                         785
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



First, there is no requirement for the transcription of testimony in a 31-2
investigation. Thus, in this case, at some key points, the Record provided only
summaries of TE Johnson’s views as understood by an investigating
committee, rather than a transcript of TE Johnson’s actual statements. Second,
there is no requirement that witnesses be cross-examined in a 31-2
investigation. This risks a less critical engagement of a man and his views
than would be afforded in a trial. In our judgment, that happened at some
points in this case. Third, the gathering of evidence is typically less exacting
in a 31-2 investigation than would be the case in a trial. That means, as was
true in this matter, that there may well be material in the Record that does not
bear directly on the matter at hand, or that key evidence may not be included
because there is no one charged with gathering all the evidence as would be
the case if there were a prosecutor. Fourth, since the 31-2 process is focused
on investigation and information gathering, evidence may not be developed
and presented in the systematic way that one would hope would occur in the
context of a trial. That was certainly true in this case and, at times, it made it
difficult for the appellate court to follow the reasoning that underlaid TE
Johnson’s views and the reasoning of the one(s) who have concerns.

None of these comments are intended to argue that Missouri Presbytery erred
in its findings, although we could certainly wish that they had probed some
key aspects of TE Johnson’s views more deeply at some points. It is simply
to point out the difficulties that come with trying to address doctrinal concerns
through a 31-2 investigation.37 Given those concerns, it is our conviction that
doctrinal cases, such as this one, generally are better handled by concerned
parties bringing charges against the individual about whose views there is
concern, rather than seeking a 31-2 investigation or bringing a Complaint
about the outcome of such an investigation.

III. Ongoing Concerns about Some of TE Johnson’s Views.

The SJC has found that Missouri Presbytery did not “clearly err at its meeting
on July 21, 2020, when it declined to commence process on” several
allegations that were brought against TE Greg Johnson. As we noted above in
Part I, the SJC’s Reasoning in support of its Judgment should not be read as a
37
     Indeed, it is not clear that 31-2 is even intended to be a mechanism for getting at
     doctrinal issues. Note that what is required is that “They [Sessions and Presbyteries]
     shall with due diligence and great discretion demand from such persons satisfactory
     explanations concerning reports affecting their Christian character.” That language
     suggests that 31-2 is intended primarily for “character related issues” rather than
     issues related to doctrine.
                                             786
                                  APPENDIX T



defense or vindication of TE Johnson or any of his statements or views. This
is because defending or vindicating TE Johnson is not the role of the appellate
court. The SJC, rather, found that Presbytery was not unreasonable in its
decisions declining to indict. The statements of TE Johnson that were extracted
from the Record of the Case, collated, and included in the Reasoning afford
warrant for that particular finding.

At the same time, as those who concur in SJC’s Decision, we wish, for the
sake of conscience and for the good of the broader church, to register concerns
raised by certain statements of TE Johnson that appear in the record. TE
Johnson has not been as careful as he ought to have been in expressing his
views – an exhortation that Missouri Presbytery has formally conveyed to TE
Johnson (ROC 1003, 1004). In particular, he has not given proper attention to
how his expressions would be heard and received in the broader church. We
offer three examples.

First, TE Johnson has spoken of his same-sex attraction and identity in ways
that have unsettled and alarmed the church. In a public address, reflecting on
his life before and after his conversion, Johnson states, “it’s not my sexual
orientation that’s changed; its’s my life orientation, because Jesus rescued me,
a sinner…” (ROC 555). In the same address, he refers to himself in the present
as “gay” – “gay people excel in every field, driven by a never-ending need to
accomplish enough, be successful enough, in order to become lovable. We
decorate our lives to poster over our shame in the hope that we’ll become
lovable” (ROC 556). Similarly, in a 2019 article for Christianity Today, TE
Johnson states, “Jesus hasn’t made me straight. But he covers over my shame.
Jesus really loves gay people” (ROC 904).

And yet, TE Johnson also speaks of his same-sex attraction and identity in
more qualified and guarded fashion. The Record testifies to TE Johnson’s clear
and longstanding refusal to speak of himself using the couplet “gay Christian”
(ROC 812). TE Johnson no less disavows celebrating “fallen sexuality” and
“sin-identity” (ROC 939, 829). He denies that any “Christian should have a
fallen sexual orientation as their core identity [that is,] the core identity that
defines me, the identity that then becomes what I aspire more fully to be.”
Rather, “our core identity as Christians is that we have been adopted as sons
of [the] Father into his family” (ROC 936). In response to a question put to
him by the SJC, TE Johnson affirms that same-sex attraction is sinful (ROC
1023). In response to another SJC question, TE Johnson affirms that
“homosexual immorality [is] more heinous than heterosexual immorality…”
(ROC 1041).
                                       787
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The language that TE Johnson has publicly employed to express his same-sex
attraction and identity, however, fails adequately to convey these beliefs to his
audiences, particularly Christian audiences. In fact, given the way that such
terms are used within our culture at large, to speak of himself as “gay” or to
affirm that his “orientation” has “not … changed,” without immediate
qualifiers, risks communicating to the Church what TE Johnson declares is not
true about his same-sex attraction and identity. Even so, at one point in the
Record, TE Johnson speaks dismissively about this concern – “And sometimes
religious people get really worked up about what terminology you use to
describe your fallen life orientation” (ROC 555). The Record therefore not
only indicates that TE Johnson speaks of himself in ways that have troubled
and disturbed the church, but also evidences a tone-deafness on the part of TE
Johnson about how his public self-descriptions are being understood and
received within the Church.38

Second, TE Johnson has drawn an analogy between same-sex attraction and
physical illness in such a way as to unsettle and alarm the church. In his floor
speech before the 2019 General Assembly, TE Johnson said the following:

            We don’t tell alcoholics it’s a sin to conceive of yourself as an
            alcoholic because drunkenness is a sin …. We don’t tell
            paraplegics that they should conceive of themselves as able-
            bodied because that’s God’s ideal. We wouldn’t tell an infertile
            woman that she needs to conceive of herself as fertile, and
            she’s unbelieving to conceive of herself as infertile because
            that’s not God’s design. Friends, I’m fallen, I’m broken, and
            Jesus has washed me and saved me (ROC 556).

In these remarks, TE Johnson establishes an analogy between alcoholism,
paraplegia, infertility, and his own same-sex attraction. TE Johnson draws
comparable analogies in at least two other places in the Record – “[T]he
biblical term [for identity] would be calling or vocation. We all have a calling.
And for some that calling is to glorify God in a really difficult, empty feeling

38
     We may note the parallel but distinct ways in which TE Johnson may speak of a
     person who has not entertained pornography for 15 years as a pornography “addict”
     (ROC 568), and a person who “has been sober for 18 years – hasn’t had a drink in
     18 years” as “absolutely an alcoholic “(ROC 565). What TE Johnson means by
     “addict” and “alcoholic” is that this particular sin is “part of [this person’s] story,”
     though not something that he “identif[ies]” with in the sense of “bow[ing] down to
     it” (ROC 565). But the effect of using these terms in such a way is inevitably to
     shock and disturb Christian audiences.
                                              788
                                  APPENDIX T



marriage. For some, it’s to glorify God when they have cancer. For some, it’s
to glorify God with same-sex attraction – unwanted same-sex attraction” (ROC
566); “Some people have a vocation to glorify God with a really empty
marriage that is a real struggle, but their calling is to glorify God with that.
Other people have a calling to glorify God with leukemia. And other people
have a calling to glorify God with unwanted same-sex attraction or gender
dysphoria or intersex condition” (ROC 464).

The Record testifies that, when asked by his Presbytery to explain his meaning,
TE Johnson says paraplegia, infertility, cancer, and same-sex attraction were
“similar in their being effects of the fall that cause suffering,” but “dissimilar
in terms of moral status” (ROC 961). He expressly declared to his Presbytery
that “same-sex attraction is different from these others in that it is not morally
neutral” (ROC 961-2). He says that “in my GA floor speech, I was not claiming
moral neutrality for same-sex attraction any more than I was for alcoholism.
That was not the point of my comparison” (ROC 962). TE Johnson later
declared that “sadly what many heard was a moral comparison. They
misunderstood me to be stating that same-sex attraction is morally neutral like
paraplegia and infertility. As I stated to my presbytery on June 14, 2020, ‘I
regret not qualifying my analogy during my floor speech. I had qualified that
analogy when I used it in the past and should have thought to do so at GA. I
neglected to do so then by oversight….’” (ROC 1042).

TE Johnson’s subsequent explanations are certainly welcome and clarifying.
Even so, as he acknowledges, the distinctions that he later employed to explain
his analogy in his floor speech could not have been evident from his words to
the Commissioners of the 2019 General Assembly. TE Johnson’s floor speech
surfaces prominently in the Record both in outside correspondence directed to
TE Johnson’s Presbytery and within subsequent investigations of TE Johnson.
This prominence indicates the degree to which TE Johnson’s unqualified
remarks had the effect of upsetting and disturbing the broader church.

Third, the way in which TE Johnson has spoken of change in the Christian
life has needlessly troubled the broader Church. In response to a concern raised
by Central Georgia Presbytery alleging TE Johnson’s belief “that those who
experience same-sex temptations are not normally delivered from these, and
are not normally changed in nature by the LORD” (ROC 801; compare the
letter of Grace and Peace PCA, Anna, TX, ROC 653-5), TE Johnson told his
own Presbytery, “God can do anything. He can do miracles. But the normal
pattern in this fallen world is that this is a lifelong struggle.” (ROC 943).


                                       789
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Elsewhere in the Record, Johnson states that “orientation generally does not
change. It’s very rare” (ROC 567; cf. ROC 813, 1057).

TE Johnson’s repeated emphasis upon the rarity of orientation change appears
related to a concern that he has expressed with respect to the expectations of
Christian audiences, “[religious people] want to make sure that I say I used to
be gay, implying God didn’t leave me there, implying that I’ve experienced
some level of sexual orientation change that has remained elusive for me and
for most of the believers who stand where I stand” (ROC 555). But this
emphasis upon the alleged rarity of orientation change has troubled the broader
Church. Whether or not TE Johnson is correct in his assessment of orientation
change is not our concern here. Our concern, rather, is that the vehemence of
TE Johnson’s denials of orientation change has rendered the broader Church
unsettled and uncertain with respect to TE Johnson’s commitment to
progressive sanctification, particularly the mortification of indwelling sin.

The Record indicates that, in response to questions put to him by the SJC, TE
Johnson declares his embrace of the Westminster Standards’ doctrine of
sanctification (ROC 1033-35). He stresses that “nothing I have stated has ever
been intended to suggest otherwise” than that “Jesus does change lives, and
that change is progressive” (ROC 1034). He furthermore qualifies his
statement “sexual orientation does not typically change” – “I am not saying
that God doesn’t change lives … All of these people [several persons whom
TE Johnson mentions in the material elided] are walking miracles and proof
of the gospel’s power to radically reorient a life to God. My point has been and
remains that none of this is evidence of a gay-to-straight cure” (ROC 1037,
emphasis original).

TE Johnson’s public statements about orientation change have not been
adequately framed to convey to his audiences the kinds of affirmations and
qualifications referenced in the previous paragraph. In other words, TE
Johnson has not shown proper concern for how his statements relating to
sanctification would be heard and received by the broader Church. In so
emphasizing his beliefs about the rarity of orientation change, he has generated
avoidable disturbance within the Church. Regrettably, the closing quotation in
the paragraph above suggests that TE Johnson does not yet fully apprehend
how his public statements about orientation change have been received within
and have troubled the Church.




                                      790
                                  APPENDIX T



IV. Conclusion

In conclusion, we want to be clear about what we are not saying and what we
are saying. We are not saying that the Church has merely misheard or
misunderstood TE Johnson. Neither are we saying that the concerns raised
before Missouri Presbytery by outside parties with respect to TE Johnson’s
public teaching were altogether unfounded. In fact, we ourselves have
registered above serious concerns about certain of TE Johnson’s public
statements insofar as those statements lack clarity and reflect a tone-deafness
with respect to the broader Church. But, as we stressed earlier, simply having
concerns about certain of TE Johnson’s public statements is not sufficient to
find a “strong presumption of guilt” (see our discussion in Part I). The reason
that we did not vote to sustain the Complaint is because the Record of the Case,
taken as a whole, contains TE Johnson’s subsequent clarifications or
qualifications, particularly those offered in the course of Missouri Presbytery’s
investigations and later confirmed in his answers to questions posed by the
SJC, of earlier, problematic statements. Based upon the totality of the evidence
within the Record of the Case, we do not believe that there is a “strong
presumption of guilt,” notwithstanding the concerns that we have registered
here about some of TE Johnson’s public statements. This concurring opinion
was written by RE Frederick (Jay) Neikirk and TE Guy Prentiss Waters and
joined by joined by RE Daniel A. Carrell, TE Bryan Chapell, TE David F.
Coffin, Jr, TE Hoochan Paul Lee, TE Michael F. Ross, and RE Jack Wilson
(as to Parts I, II, and IV of this opinion, but only as to portions of Part III).

                          DISSENTING OPINION
                          OF RE Samuel J. Duncan

The Standing Judicial Commission, in ruling that Missouri Presbytery did not
err in this case, found it was bound by the “great deference” standard in BCO
39-3 requiring a finding of “clear error.” I believe the Presbyterian Church in
America could benefit from a review of the civil/criminal and ecclesiastical
meanings of “clear error,” since many of our cases hinge on what “clear error”
is, or is not, and how much deference should be given to presbytery decisions
and actions.

When appellate courts, be they civil/criminal or ecclesiastical, decide cases
that are properly before them, the starting point for this appellate review is to
determine the correct “standard of review.” Historically, the “standard of
review” is the amount of deference given by a higher court in reviewing a
decision of a lower court.

                                      791
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



A low standard of review (very little deference given to the lower court
decision) means that the decision under review will be reversed if the higher
court considers there is any error at all in the lower court's decision. A high
standard of review (much deference given to the lower court decision) means
that more deference is accorded to the decision under review, so that it will not
be reversed just because the higher court might have decided the matter
differently; it will be reversed only if the higher court considers the decision
to have obvious error. The standard of review may be set by statute, rule or
precedent. Generally, there are different standards for reviewing questions of
fact and questions of law, with factual findings given more deference than
questions of law.

In considering civil/criminal appeals, there are several “standards of review:”

    1. Arbitrary and Capricious: This standard of review is employed when
an appellate court determines that a factual finding by a lower court should be
reversed because it was made on unreasonable grounds or without any proper
consideration of circumstances. This is an extremely deferential standard.

      2. Substantial Evidence: This standard of review is employed when a
factual finding is made by a jury and will be normally upheld on appeal, unless
it is not supported by "substantial evidence." This means something "more than
a mere scintilla" of evidence. It means such relevant evidence as a reasonable
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion. Under the "substantial
evidence" standard, appellate review extends to whether there is any relevant
evidence in the record which reasonably supports every material fact (that is,
material in the sense of establishing an essential element of a claim or defense).
Appellate courts will not reverse such findings of fact unless there is no
reasonable basis in the evidence submitted by the parties. If the parties
presented conflicting evidence at trial, appellate courts applying a "substantial
evidence" standard assume that the jury or finder of fact resolved the conflict
in favor of the prevailing party, and in turn, appellate courts must defer to such
implicit findings of fact about which side's witnesses or documents were more
believable, even if they suspect they might have ruled differently if hearing the
evidence themselves in the first instance. This is a highly deferential standard.

    3. Clearly Erroneous: This standard of review is employed when a trial
court (bench trial, without a jury – judge is the finder/trier of fact) makes a
finding of fact, which should not be reversed unless the appellate court is left
with a "definite and firm conviction” that an error in a factual finding has been
committed by the trial court. So if the appellate court finds that, although there
                                       792
                                   APPENDIX T



was evidence to support the lower court's factual finding, the evidence taken
as a whole—including the eyewitness and the expert testimony—leaves the
appellate court with a definite and firm conviction that an error was committed
by the trial court in finding that fact, then clear error is present. This is a very
deferential standard, but it is limited to factual findings, not the decisions upon
which those factual findings are based.

     4. De Novo: This standard of review is employed when an appellate
court considers a matter as a question of law, affording no deference to the
decisions below. Decisions of a lower court on questions of law are reviewed
using this standard. This standard of review allows the appellate court to
substitute its own judgment about whether the lower court correctly applied
the law. This is a very low deferential standard.

    5. Mixed Questions of Fact and Law: Lower court decisions containing
mixed questions of law and fact are usually subjected to de novo review, unless
factual issues predominate, in which event the decision will be subject to
clearly erroneous review.

    6. Abuse of Discretion: This standard of review is employed when a
lower court has made a discretionary ruling (such as whether to allow a party
claiming a hardship to file a brief after the deadline). This is a highly
deferential standard.

The issue of what “standard of review” should be used by higher ecclesiastical
courts when reviewing actions of lower ecclesiastical courts was presented to
the 24th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America in June,
1996 in the Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Judicial Procedure (the
“Report”). See 24th General Assembly, 1996, 24-17, p. 65)

The Report noted that “one of the more difficult problems facing the PCA has
been the question of how judicial cases should be handled by the Assembly”
and stated that “one of the central concerns” at the founding of the PCA “was
a failure of Church discipline.” The Report reminded the PCA, from the
“Message to All Churches” that “[w]hen a denomination will not exercise
discipline and its courts have become heterodox or disposed to tolerate error”
the minority will find itself having to be “submissive to a tolerant and erring
majority.” The “Message” declared that this development was the exercise of
discipline in reverse, making separation a necessity (and the eventual forming
of the PCA).


                                        793
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



In other words, and bringing this age old conflict to the present, a lower court’s
relaxed (tolerant) or refusal to biblically discipline its members must not be
protected from a higher court’s review by a highly deferential standard of
review.

The PCA’s initial practice of handling all judicial matters at the General
Assembly, and subsequently a standing judicial commission, whose decisions
were then approved by the General Assembly, proved to be impractical or
unsatisfactory, leading to the creation of this Ad Interim Committee, whose
recommendations, including a new “standard of review,” were adopted by the
PCA and made a part of the BCO, which now constitute our current practice.

Part C of the Report’s Recommendations covered “Standards for Review”
noting that the issue was a “need for a common standard of judicial review,
clearly reflecting Presbyterian constitutional principles, to guide the higher
courts in fulfilling their obligations under this chapter.” To address this need,
the following “standards of review” were adopted and made a part of BCO 39-
3:

        ….To insure that this Constitution is not amended, violated
        or disregarded in judicial process, any review of the
        judicial proceedings of a lower court by a higher court
        shall be guided by the following principles:
            1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should
                 limit itself to the issues raised by the parties to the
                 case in the original (lower) court. Further, the
                 higher court should resolve such issues by
                 applying the Constitution of the church, as
                 previously established through the constitutional
                 process.
            2. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
                 deference to a lower court regarding those factual
                 matters which the lower court is more competent
                 to determine, because of its proximity to the
                 events in question, and because of its personal
                 knowledge and observations of the parties and
                 witnesses involved. Therefore, a higher court
                 should not reverse a factual finding of a lower
                 court, unless there is clear error on the part of the
                 lower court.


                                        794
                                  APPENDIX T



            3. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
               deference to a lower court regarding those matters
               of discretion and judgment which can only be
               addressed by a court with familiar acquaintance of
               the events and parties. Such matters of discretion
               and judgment would include, but not be limited to:
               the moral character of candidates for sacred office,
               the appropriate censure to impose after a
               disciplinary trial, or judgment about the
               comparative credibility of conflicting witnesses.
               Therefore, a higher court should not reverse such
               a judgment by a lower court, unless there is clear
               error on the part of the lower court.
            4. The higher court does have the power and
               obligation of judicial review, which cannot be
               satisfied by always deferring to the findings of a
               lower court. Therefore, a higher court should not
               consider itself obliged to exhibit the same
               deference to a lower court when the issues being
               reviewed involve the interpretation of the
               Constitution of the Church. Regarding such issues,
               the higher court has the duty and authority to
               interpret and apply the Constitution of the Church
               according to its best abilities and understanding,
               regardless of the opinion of the lower court.

As grounds for this BCO amendment, the Report noted that this proposal
would “insure that in judicial review the Constitution actually functions as
intended, and is not amended, violated or disregarded in judicial process.
Further, clear standards of judicial review will help to preserve the
Constitutional graduation of authority while upholding each court’s rights and
responsibilities.” Unfortunately, at this time, I do not believe these “standards
of review” are as clear and properly applied as the drafters of this BCO
amendment had hoped.

When does this “clear error” standard apply? How is this “clear error”
standard applied? Does this “clear error” standard apply to every action or
decision of a lower court, or is this “clear error” standard of review limited to
the context of the trials of ordination, a trial/censure in a discipline case, or
quasi fact finding situations?


                                      795
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Surely a higher court is not expected to “rubber stamp” all actions of a lower
court. And cutting to the heart of the matter, should higher courts give this
“great deference” to all actions of a lower court, especially those actions
involving the question of whether or not a member should be disciplined?
Should a lower court’s failure or refusal to fully begin and complete the
discipline process be given just a cursory review, justified by a potential
misunderstanding of how the “clear error” standard of review should be
applied? No and No!

In BCO 39-3.2, the “clear error” standard applies to “factual matters,” because
the lower court is more familiar with the “parties” and “witnesses” than the
higher court. The reference to “parties” and “witnesses” would seem to make
this sub-section apply the “clear error” standard to factual findings from an
actual trial, as opposed to a non-trial action or decision. At an actual trial,
witnesses and evidence are presented that either fact “A” or fact “B” occurred.
When this court of original jurisdiction or initial trier of fact determines that
fact “B” is true, this is the type of “factual matter” to which the “clear error”
standard of review applies. In other words, the lower court’s factual finding
that fact “B” occurred should not be reversed without a ruling from the higher
court that finding fact “B” was “clear error.”

In BCO 39-3.3, the “clear error” standard applies to matters of “discretion and
judgment,” because the lower court is more familiar with the “events” and
“witnesses” than the higher court. Given examples of these matters of
discretion and judgment are: the “moral character of candidates for sacred
office, the appropriate censure to impose after a disciplinary trial, or judgment
about the comparative credibility of witnesses.” The reference to “events” and
“parties” would seem to describe situations in which a lower court determines
certain facts or makes decisions/takes actions after hearing conflicting
testimony, statements, arguments, or reports from more than one person.
The examples given relate to a lower court acting as an initial trier or finder of
certain facts and making decisions or taking actions based on those facts. First,
based on his testimony and answers to questions at his trials of ordination, a
candidate’s moral character is either acceptable or not. Second, the imposition
of a censure is obviously after a trial, or a confession, at which time certain
facts were either determined by the lower court after a trial or confessed by the
accused, and serve as the basis for a particular censure. Third, the credibility
of witnesses giving conflicting testimony could serve as a basis for finding that
one witness is more credible than the other.

When the court of original jurisdiction or the initial trier/finder of fact
determines that a candidate’s moral character is bad, or the censure of
                                       796
                                  APPENDIX T



deposition from office is warranted, or that witness “A” is more credible than
witness “B,” these are the types of matters of “discretion and judgment” to
which the “clear error” standard of review applies. In other words, the lower
court’s decision, after hearing a candidate’s answers to questions from the
floor, or what is an appropriate censure after a guilty verdict, or confession, or
conflicting statements from adversarial parties/witnesses, should not be
reversed without a ruling from the higher court that the decision rendered by
the lower court in the crucible of a disputed matter or quasi fact finding matter,
was “clear error.” While these types of “factual” determinations would be
subject to the “clear error” standard of review, it does not necessarily follow
that a lower court’s actions/decisions based on those facts would be subject to
the same “clear error” standard, especially in situations when the lower court’s
action/decision is not supported by those facts.

It should be noted that no examples are given in BCO 39-3.3 outside of
situations involving the trials of ordination, an actual trial (or confession), or
quasi fact finding matters involving the credibility of witnesses. Accordingly,
the “clear error” standard of review would not be applicable to a lower court’s
decisions/actions that do not arise from similar contexts. Therefore, the “clear
error” standard of review should not be applied to a decision/action of a lower
court finding that no strong presumption of guilt existed. The proper standard
of review in those situations would fall under BCO 39-03.4, which is basically
the de novo standard of review.

In conclusion, the “clear error” standard of review would be applicable to the
matters and situations set out above, but would not be applicable in situations
that did not involve some type of factual finding of a lower court following the
trials of ordination or an actual trial or confession or some action/decision of
a lower court that was not the result of a quasi-fact finding situation. This
dissenting opinion was written by RE Samuel J. Duncan and joined by RE
John Bise, RE Steve Dowling and RE John White.

                          DISSENTING OPINION
                           Of RE Steve Dowling

We respectfully dissent from the court’s ruling in this case on the following
grounds:

    1. That Presbytery did not exercise the “due diligence” required by BCO
       31-2 in its investigation and that it therefore committed “clear error”
       [BCO 39-3] in making its determinations;


                                       797
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    2. That the SJC was not bound by the “great deference” requirement of
       BCO 39-3 because this is a case centering on Constitutional
       interpretation; and
    3. That the substantive conclusions reached by Presbytery and confirmed
       by the SJC do not follow from the facts in the Record of the case.

The first two grounds are procedural, while the third is on the merits of the
case. Each of these grounds is important, and each error has significant
consequences for the denomination.

That Presbytery did not exercise the due diligence required by BCO 31-2
in its investigation and that it therefore committed clear error [BCO 39-
3] in its determinations

While this case is nuanced, it isn’t particularly complex and some parts of it
are simple. One of the easiest things to understand about it is that the SJC
went through most of the judicial process, including its final hearing with the
parties to the case, and then opened the record to get more information. Here
is the court’s reasoning for doing that:

        The SJC believes it is necessary to attempt to clarify the
        Record of the Case because its magnitude (over 600 pages
        covering multiple years of writing, speaking, and judicial
        processes) makes it difficult to ascertain if specific
        representations of perspectives of TE Johnson are his
        actual or present theological convictions.

The first thing to notice here is that the SJC says it sought further clarification
because the ROC was hard to understand. If the SJC -a group that is
reasonably expert in these kinds of processes and issues- cannot make enough
sense of the record to reach a conclusion, it’s difficult to see how Presbytery
understood it well enough to reach its conclusions. Further, the SJC had before
it not only everything Presbytery had before it as a court, but also additional
briefs, the benefit of a full hearing, and more oral examination of the parties.
Though we have no doubt about the fair motives of the court, it proved through
its actions that due diligence hadn’t been exercised by Presbytery. If it had
been, there could be no need to get clarification after a record had once been
declared judicially in order, a hearing held, and SJC deliberations begun.

It bears noting that the extent of this clarification was substantial. It wasn’t
just that there was a question or two about some specific point in the record,
                                       798
                                  APPENDIX T



but instead the apparent need for the SJC to form a committee to create
interrogatives, communicate them to the accused, and receive his responses.
This process resulted in 103 questions being submitted by members of the SJC.
From that catalog of questions, the committee chose 25 that it deemed the most
useful (through a blind grading process). TE Johnson answered the questions,
and these answers -over and against the contents of the original ROC- provide
much of the substance cited by the SJC in its support of Presbytery. For
example, Allegation #1 is denied with 7 citations, 6 of which are from SJC
questions. The denial of Allegation #2 is supported by 4 citations from the
original ROC, and 4 from the SJC’s additional questions. For Allegation #3,
the original ROC is cited once and the SJC’s questions are cited 7 times, and
the numbers for Allegation #4 are 4 from the original record and 4 from the
SJC.

The SJC’s supplemental work produced 67% of the citations used by it in
support of Presbytery’s conclusions, strongly suggesting that Presbytery’s
investigation was inadequate. If the investigation was inadequate, then
Presbytery’s conclusions constitute “clear error.”

The second thing to observe in the decision’s justification is that the SJC
wasn’t sure whether

        … specific representations of perspectives of TE Johnson
        are his actual or present theological convictions.

BCO Preliminary Principle 8 says this:

        Since ecclesiastical discipline must be purely moral or
        spiritual in its object, and not attended with any civil
        effects, it can derive no force whatever, but from its own
        justice, the approbation of an impartial public, and the
        countenance and blessing of the great Head of the Church.

It’s hard to conceive that an ‘impartial public’ would approve of seeking the
“present theological convictions” of an accused nearly two years after the
discrete incident resulting in a complaint occurred, particularly in the absence
of any effort to acquire contrary evidence. This extension of time to the present
and ex post facto acquisition of information on the part of the court appears to
be a misuse of judicial discretion, with the court having undertaken more of a
pseudo-BCO 31-2 investigation than an action to perfect the record. Since the
opportunity to answer questions two years after the fact was extended to TE
                                      799
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Johnson, then the door should have opened to evidence (if there is any) related
to his actions, social media utterances, and writings over the past two years
which might contradict the veracity of his carefully formulated responses.
Collecting evidence in that manner would be consistent with the desire for a
complete record rather than merely an expanded record.
Discussions of investigative balance aside, TE Johnson’s present positions are
irrelevant to the complaint against him. The actions of the court and TE
Speck’s subsequent complaint exist within a discrete timeframe that ended
with the initiation of the complaint. It’s a closed set of circumstances, and
subsequent events and information cannot properly be introduced.

In summary, the SJC’s actions bear testimony to the fact that Presbytery’s
investigation was inadequate, and since it was inadequate the subsequent
determinations made on that inadequate investigation were “clear error.”
Moreover, the SJC distorted the record -however unintentionally- by soliciting
the “present” views of TE Johnson.

That the SJC was not bound by the “great deference” requirement because
this is a case centering on Constitutional interpretation

There are limitations on courts of review in the PCA. BCO 39-3 enumerates
these, saying first that a higher court should limit itself in its decisions to issues
raised by the lower courts, and that higher courts shouldn’t overturn the
decisions of lower courts unless there is “clear error.” In applying these
limitations there are conditions and exceptions. For example, BCO 39-3.2
presupposes that the lower court’s proximity to the events in question better
qualifies it to judge a case, and BCO 39-3.3 presupposes better ability to judge
based on “familiar acquaintance” with events and parties. Putting aside the
obvious argument that familiarity may actually compromise a court’s
objectivity in some cases, BCO 39-3.4 establishes that:

         The higher court does have the power and obligation of
         judicial review, which cannot be satisfied by always
         deferring to the findings of a lower court. Therefore, a
         higher court should not consider itself obliged to exhibit
         the same deference to a lower court when the issues being
         reviewed involve the interpretation of the Constitution of
         the Church. Regarding such issues, the higher court has
         the duty and authority to interpret and apply the



                                         800
                                   APPENDIX T



        Constitution of the Church according to its best abilities
        and understanding, regardless of the opinion of the lower
        court.

The matter at hand is a doctrinal case requiring interpretation of the
Constitution of the Church and the SJC was not obliged to grant “great
deference” to the lower court. Moreover, the SJC had the duty to address the
issues raised in the complaint without dependence on the “great deference”
standard, but it conducted the case instead as if it were bound by the provisions
of BCO 39-3.2 and 3. While we respect the SJC’s unwillingness to exceed its
mandate, or to position itself as the arbiter of truth for the Assembly, this is an
abdication of responsibility with respect to BCO 39-3.4.

Further, by not meeting its obligation to interpret the constitution of the church
under BCO 39-3.4, the SJC has affirmed Presbytery’s authority to make
Constitutional and theological declarations on behalf of the denomination.
Since the decision made by Presbytery in declining to indict has been affirmed,
the SJC not only has reinforced the idea that this authority lies with individual
Presbyteries, it has also formalized a dubious Constitutional interpretation of
SSA and how it applies to ordination.

That the substantive conclusions reached by Presbytery and confirmed by
the SJC do not follow from the facts in the Record of the case

Again, while nuanced, this case only becomes complex when the things
pertaining to sexual dysphoria among Christians generally are made indistinct
from ordination requirements, and when the semantic ranges of terms used in
the discussion are narrowed, expanded, or otherwise changed according to
undiscernable criteria. In the first case, solid biblical arguments for the church
to embrace “sexual minorities” are extended to ordained service as if there
could be no category of sin, or no operative level of a specific type of sin, that
is a priori disqualifying. In the second, the symbols (or words) with which we
communicate are redefined without agreement, having been appropriated by
those with special knowledge of the distinctions they desire from the symbols.

For example, the word “homosexual” appears just under 2400 times in the
record for this case. In virtually all the places where it’s used the term is
semantically equivalent to “same sex attracted,” so there seems to be a high
correlation between the symbol and the thing signified in common usage, with
some translators using the word to translate arsenokoitai 1 Corinthians 6:7-9.
Even so, here is what TE Johnson says:
                                       801
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



          Neither malakoi or arsenokoitai map very tightly onto
        this modern use of gay or homosexual or same-sex
        attracted as an orientation.

He is saying that the biblical strictures are not closely aligned with the
“modern” use of the words as an “orientation,” but there is no biblical support
for arguing that the concepts in 1 Corinthians 6 are culturally bound. Pucci
provides some insight here:

        …the Muses sing a discourse similar to true things, but
        with some distortion, invention, or deflection -in a word,
        with some differences. The similarity vouches for the
        credibility of the discourse, while the invention, deflection,
        and difference make it false.

We mean by this that fine distinctions and novel interpretations may obfuscate
truth rather than illuminate it, and that the effort to more narrowly define
meaning can have the effect of removing meaning altogether, turning truth into
falsehood and vice-versa. In this case, TE Johnson’s reinterpretation of the
meanings of malakoi and arsenokoitai through a modern lens to make a
distinction related to “orientation” does little to clarify the issue from a biblical
standpoint.

The ROC is clear that TE Johnson identifies himself as a “same-sex attracted
man.” Irrespective of whether there’s a distinction between that and
“homosexual,” and whether or not malakoi and arsenokoitai “map tightly” to
the scriptures condemning homosexuality, TE Johnson provides enough
evidence from his own statements to make it obvious that this characteristic is
so core to his being and so central to his personal narrative that it disqualifies
him from ordained service.

TE Johnson’s testimony establishes that he has seen himself as same-sex
attracted since he was 11 years old. He says he has never had an attraction to
a woman and that he finds the idea of looking at a woman lustfully
“disgusting.” He says that his public ministry as a same-sex attracted man is
intended to help others who are suffering and ashamed about their own same-
sex attraction, and in his 2019 General Assembly speech, he claimed that
Article 7 of the Nashville Statement “hurt” because it asserts that it is a sin to
adopt a homosexual self-conception.



                                        802
                                   APPENDIX T



TE Johnson’s self-identification per se, then, is not a disputable issue; the real
question is whether this identification “compromises and dishonors” his
identity in Christ, and there is good reason to conclude that it does, because
TE Johnson consistently palliates the sin of same-sex attraction such that he
dishonors God. For example, he first appeals to the universality of sin to make
the argument that same-sex attraction is just like any other sin, while the
Constitution’s exposition of Scripture asserts that some sins are more heinous
than others (with homosexuality “more heinous” than even inappropriate
heterosexual activity by virtue of it being against nature).

While it is true that all people are sinners, it is not true that all sins alike are
equal. If they were, then every argument advanced by TE Johnson with respect
to same-sex attraction would have to apply equally to every kind of sin. The
sin of pedophilia would have to be considered no worse than anger; the sin of
bestiality no worse than drunkenness. While it is true that all people are sinners
and all deserve God’s wrath, and while it is true that no one’s righteousness is
good enough to contribute to his salvation, arguments for sin equivalencies
mock the word of God and dishonor Him.

Second, TE Johnson is a late middle-aged man of high achievement. He is
well-educated and has an earned PhD establishing him as an expert historian.
He is an author. He is a lifelong minster who carries the imprimatur of a
Seminary education and ordination by one of the most biblically sound
denominations in the world. All these things constitute aggravations of his
sinful same-sex attraction and his teaching related to it according to the
Constitution of the church. Question 151 of the Larger Catechism asks what
constitute aggravating factors for sins more heinous, and they are these: “…if
they (the persons offending) be of riper age, greater experience or grace,
eminent for profession, gifts, place, office, guides to others, and those whose
example is likely to be followed by others.”

TE Johnson not only dishonors God in his prominent self-identification as a
same-sex attracted man, the matter is made worse by his age, leadership
position, and level of achievement.

The ROC demonstrates that TE Johnson is capable of formulating an orthodox
view of sanctification, but it also demonstrates that he minimizes the
possibility of change for people suffering from sexual dysphoria. He
acknowledges that God can do anything in much the same way Cessationists
acknowledge that God could still perform a miracle in the world; that is, He
could, but He won’t. He contends strongly -on the basis of his research and
                                        803
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



experience- that orientation change practically never happens, citing statistics
that establish that only 3.5% to 4% of people will ever experience any change
from same-sex attraction to natural attraction.

In his arguments TE Johnson rests on appeals to his own authority, first as a
same-sex attracted man, then as an academic, then as a theologian, and then as
a minister. He communicates authoritatively and effectively, and he has clearly
convinced many that his understanding of how God interacts with same-sex
attracted people is the right one: God’s ability to change people affected by
this particular sin is only a remote possibility and should not be held out as a
realistic hope for Christians; it would be extremely rare that they might change.
There cannot be a more succinct denial of God’s power to sanctify.

At the same time, the form of this argument is the opposite of TE Johnson’s
argument about the equivalency of sin. First, he claims that all sin is alike and
SSA is no different from any other sin in order to establish that it cannot be a
disqualifying factor for ordination. He subsequently says that while all sin is
alike, and all people are sinners, sins related to sexual dysphoria are utterly
different in that God hardly ever acts to change people from them and therefore
those sins need to be accepted as an ontological phenomenon -they are part of
being. By that line of reasoning any other sexual sin must also be accepted as
a condition of being, whatever the perversion.

While the ROC doesn’t show that TE Johnson entirely denies that
sanctification could extend to a sexual orientation change, it clearly shows that
he doesn’t expect it to, even arguing that people need to understand the truth
and not be optimistic about change when they are saved [ROC 461, ROC 928,
etc.,]. In the same way, TE Johnson both claims the power of sanctification in
his life and denies it, particularly when he speaks about his sexual appetites,
which continue unabated:

        I share about once a year from the pulpit that I’m a porn
        addict. I haven’t actually looked at pornography for 15
        years, but when I did, I was all in and that pull is still as
        strong as it was. I’ve mortified this for 15 years and it still,
        you know, I see a computer terminal unmonitored and
        immediately my mind thinks, I want to look at porn. Fifteen
        years of strangling this thing, and it doesn’t die, it doesn’t
        go away [ROC 453}…



                                        804
                                 APPENDIX T



And:

        TE Johnson: “You wanna know about my sexual
        brokenness? I am happy to talk to you about what I talked
        about in the pulpit two weeks ago, and that I think is
        relevant to this conversation. I am a pornography addict.
        I have had a pornography addiction for 15 years. Actually
        18” Interviewer 2: “Are you still doing pornography,
        Greg?” TE Johnson: “No, I haven’t for 15 years.”
        Interviewer 1: 1 “So you’re not an addict.” Interviewer 2:
        “So you’re not an addict anymore.” TE Johnson: “Oh, but
        I know what it does inside of me. You see, I know that if I
        look at one image, I’m going to look at a thousand. I
        know I’m not going to come up for air for hours.” [ROC
        553-554, 568”]

Some might be tempted to minimize these statements because of the
circumstances of a live interview. TE Johnson says as much, having called the
interaction a “train wreck.” That is an assessment of the outcome but not
necessarily the conversation, since the interviewers were clearly trying to
dissuade TE Johnson from the point he was trying to make, while TE Johnson
himself argued harder and harder for his vulnerability to these sins in order to
impress upon them how powerful its control is over him. The Constitutional
aggravations listed above apply here. If TE Johnson were young or naïve or
inexperienced in public interactions, these might serve to mitigate his
responsibility for what he said; it might provide an argument from extenuation.
Instead, he is mature, educated, esteemed, and an accomplished public
speaker. He clearly believes what he insistently told these interviewers and his
words cannot be ignored.

By these beliefs and descriptions of his own experience, TE Johnson
minimizes God’s purposes and power in sanctification, while at the same time
demonstrating the grip by which his sin holds him. In his testimony [ROC
610], his sermons [ROC 606], his public speeches [ROC 556] and his writings
[ROC 812-830] TE Johnson has made his homosexuality central to his self-
perception, his self-presentation, and to his ministry. He has become a public
figure as a result, and it is clear from the record that he is regarded as an
authority on the subject -one who expressly teaches and intends to teach his
version of “truth” as it relates to SSA.



                                      805
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



While the ROC and his public utterances demonstrate great facility with
language and theological nuance and sometimes serve to obfuscate clear
issues, TE Johnson’s fundamental argument for serving as an ordained
minister of the gospel is that he is now -and has always been- chaste, making
him immune to disciplinary action for sexual misconduct.

By this standard no sexual predilection is disqualifying so long as it doesn’t
materialize in an act. Therefore, the pedophile who suffers in the way TE
Johnson does -that is, one who had no hope of change or no resistance to a
single look at child pornography such that he “…wouldn’t come up for air for
hours…” is eligible for ordination. The same would also clearly be true of
someone who struggled with illicit heterosexual attractions under the same
conditions, yet it is unimaginable that a man would be called as a minister of
the gospel who said, “I struggle with lust for women to the point that I don’t
expect change, and I’m also an addict who is one look away from complete
immersion in pornography -but don’t worry, I only think about it. I’m not
currently doing it.”.

Despite the many excellent points made by TE Johnson about the difficulties
faced by Christians who experience SSA or sexual dysphoria, and despite
much good advice on how to minister to “sexual minorities,” these arguments
cannot be applied without distinction to ordained service.

In summary, the SJC overlooked the clear deficiencies of Presbytery’s
investigation, which is proven by re-opening the record and admitting
additional information that sought the “present” positions of TE Johnson,
extending consideration of facts well beyond the events complained against.
Moreover, it was incumbent on the SJC to deal with the matters raised by the
Complainant as issues of Constitutional interpretation instead of deferring to
the lower court in this case. For these procedural reasons and based on the
merits of the complaint, we respectfully dissent from the majority decision.

This opinion was written by RE Steve Dowling and joined by joined by TE
Paul Bankson, RE John Bise, RE Mel Duncan, RE Sam Duncan, TE Fred
Greco, and RE John White.

           SJC ANSWER TO THE DISSENTING OPINION
                   of RE Steve Dowling et al.

SJC Manual 18.12.c permits the SJC to “Answer” a Dissenting or Concurring
Opinion, a procedure akin to the general answering provision in BCO 45-5.
                                     806
                                  APPENDIX T



While this procedure is rarely used, the Commission finds it necessary to take
this step in this present Case because we conclude that the referenced Dissent
mischaracterizes key conclusions of the SJC’s Decision. We are concerned
these mischaracterizations may lead to confusion in the Church regarding the
PCA Constitution and what the SJC actually decided in this Case, and, in turn,
how the Decision may apply to future situations.

Even as we take this step, however, we want to assure the Assembly the SJC
seeks to operate as a collegial court, and we have been blessed with a good
measure of success. We intend for our Answer to be understood in this light.

We organize our Answer by addressing some problematic assertions in the
Dissent, by responding to the procedural concerns raised, and by interacting
with the Dissent’s allegation that “the substantive conclusions reached by
Presbytery and confirmed by the SJC do not follow from the facts in the
Record of the case.”

1. Erroneous Assertions in the Dissent - Before addressing the specific
procedural and substantive concerns raised by the Dissent, we believe it
important to address three assertions in the Dissent that we find to be
problematic.

1A.     Erroneous Assertions 1 & 2: Concerning the Authority of a Church
        Court to Render a Constitutional Interpretation of SSA

The first two assertions are made in the following quote from the Dissent.
(Emphasis added.)

        [T]he SJC has affirmed Presbytery’s authority to make
        Constitutional and theological declarations on behalf of the
        denomination. Since the decision made by Presbytery in
        declining to indict has been affirmed, the SJC not only has
        reinforced the idea that this authority lies within individual
        Presbyteries, it has also formalized a dubious Constitutional
        interpretation of SSA and how it applies to ordination. (p. 4.)

First, contrary to the assertion in the quote, our ruling and opinion in this Case
do not “make” the Constitutional interpretation of “SSA” that is alleged in the
second half of the Dissent (pp. 4-7). Such a claim mistakenly construes the
ruling and opinion of the SJC in this Case. In each of the discussions of our
reasoning for declining to sustain the four substantive allegations brought in
                                       807
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



the Complaint, we concluded only that the Complainant had not met his
burden, based on the Record, of demonstrating Presbytery erred in declining
to indict TE Johnson. Thus, in responding to Allegation 1 we wrote:

          “If the Record demonstrated that the above statements [from
         the Complainant] were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s
         views, it would have been proper to sustain the Complaint.
         Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it was not
         unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does
         not hold these positions and that he affirms….”39

In short, we indicated that holding the kinds of positions alleged in the
Complaint would likely make an officer in the PCA liable to indictment by
their court of original jurisdiction. The conclusion, however, was that the
Record in this Case did not demonstrate Presbytery clearly erred in concluding
TE Johnson did not hold the views alleged. The dissenters may conclude the
SJC was wrong in that determination, and they have every right to make that
argument in a dissent. It is not accurate, however, to assert the SJC is staking
out a new position on “SSA” when the ruling and the opinion clearly affirm
that the SJC Decision was based on a finding that the facts in the Record did
not sustain the allegations that were made in the Complaint.

Having said that, we wish to highlight one other aspect of the SJC’s opinion
that contradicts this assertion of the Dissent. For each of the first three
allegations, our Opinion begins by providing quotes from the Complaint that
were offered in support of the given allegation. In each instance we then go
on to say: “If the Record demonstrated that the above statements were an
accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper to sustain
the Complaint.”40 For the fourth allegation, while the Opinion does not offer
statements from the Complaint, the Opinion does say:

         “If the Complainant had demonstrated, for example, that the
         minister was involved in homosexual behavior, cultivated
         unrepentant lustings, taught that either of those were not sinful,
         or was not continually seeking to mortify those temptations, it
         would have been proper to sustain the Complaint.”41

39
   Opinion p. 13. See identical conclusions on Allegations 2 and 3 on pp. 16, 18, and
   a similar conclusion to Allegation 4 on p. 23, changed only to reflect the different
   nature of this allegation.
40
   See Opinion pp. 13, 16, and 18.
41
   Opinion p. 23.
                                         808
                                      APPENDIX T



Our point in including all these statements was to try to set forth some
guiderails that reflect our understanding of the Confessional boundaries of
orthodoxy regarding beliefs and practices that can characterize ordained men
in the PCA on matters related to same-sex attraction, same-sex behaviors, etc.
We believe those statements reflect quite well the conclusions of the PCA’s
Ad Interim Committee on Sexuality.42 Thus, ironically, rather than setting
forth some novel “Constitutional interpretation of SSA” as the Dissent
suggests, the SJC’s Opinion contains a series of strong and consistent
statements that are grounded in the Church’s Confessional teaching on these
issues, and that echo the testimony of the Ad Interim Committee Report to that
teaching. The SJC did not find that the Record clearly provided evidence
showing Presbytery had erred in its decision not to indict TE Johnson. That
finding should not distract the reader from the clear, Confessional positions on
same-sex attraction and sexual immorality that are contained in the Opinion.

Second, in the Dissent’s quote cited above on page 1, the Dissent alleges the
SJC has “affirmed Presbytery’s authority to make Constitutional and
theological declarations on behalf of the denomination.” But this conclusion
is based on a misunderstanding of our polity. Presbyteries (and Sessions)
already have the right and responsibility to make Constitutional and
theological declarations. That right, however, comes not from anything the
SJC has done or could do, but from the nature of our graded courts. (See BCO
11-3,4.) 43 Thus, every court in the PCA is responsible to make theological

42
      https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-48th-GA-5-28-20-
   1.pdf
43
   BCO 11-3 - All Church courts are one in nature, constituted of the same elements,
   possessed inherently of the same kinds of rights and powers, and differing only as
   the Constitution may provide. When, however, according to Scriptural example, and
   needful to the purity and harmony of the whole Church, disputed matters of doctrine
   and order arising in the lower courts are referred to the higher courts for decision,
   such referral shall not be so exercised as to impinge upon the authority of the lower
   court. (Emphasis added.)
      BCO 11-4, para 2 - Every court has the right to resolve questions of doctrine and
   discipline seriously and reasonably proposed, and in general to maintain truth and
   righteousness, condemning erroneous opinions and practices which tend to the
   injury of the peace, purity, or progress of the Church. Although each court exercises
   exclusive original jurisdiction over all matters especially belonging to it, the lower
   courts are subject to the review and control of the higher courts, in regular gradation.
   These courts are not separate and independent tribunals, but they have a mutual
   relation, and every act of jurisdiction is the act of the whole Church performed by it
   through the appropriate organ.

                                           809
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



and Constitutional determinations as such issues come before them. Indeed, it
is precisely to protect that right of the lower courts that BCO 39-3 exists.44

At the same time, we recognize that right of the lower courts is not unlimited.
As BCO 11-4, BCO 39, and BCO 40 all make clear, there is a right and
responsibility of higher courts to exercise “review and control” over the lower
courts. But that oversight is clearly limited by the Constitution. It must also
be conducted within the proper purview and procedures of the higher court as
set forth in our Constitution and rules. Among other things, this means that
the SJC, in dealing with a complaint, is limited to the issues raised by the
parties45 and to the evidence contained in the Record of the case.46 For the SJC
to reach a conclusion that cannot be sustained from the Record, no matter how
popular that decision might be to some, would be a breach of its Constitutional
limitations and would trample upon the rights and responsibilities of the lower
courts in the PCA.

In short, far from affirming some new right for presbyteries, our Decision in
this Case serves to preserve the proper prerogatives of the lower courts of the
PCA and to underscore the right of review and control, appropriately
exercised, including through judicial process. Again, it would be mistaken to
conclude that the SJC has recognized some new right for presbyteries. Rather,
the SJC acted within the scope of our Constitutional responsibilities and limits.
In so doing, we found that the allegations in the Complaint regarding the views
held by TE Johnson were not sustained from the Record.

1B.      Erroneous Assertion 3: Concerning Acting on a Complaint and the
         Discipline of an Officer

The third erroneous assertion is found in this quote from the Dissent:

         TE Johnson provides enough evidence from his own
         statements to make it obvious that this characteristic
         (identifying himself as a ‘same-sex attracted man’) is so core
         to his being and so central to his personal narrative that it
         disqualifies him from ordained service. (p. 5)

This conclusion, at least as stated, asserts that the SJC should have found TE
Johnson guilty of an offence that must lead to his removal from ordained office

44
   Note the italicized material in the quote from BCO 11-3 in the footnote above.
45
   BCO 39-3.1. This is also the thrust of BCO 43-1,3; OMSJC 14.4, etc.
46
   BCO 32-18 (para. 5). See also the 4th vow for SJC members in RAO 17-1.
                                         810
                                   APPENDIX T



in the PCA. Such a finding, however, would go far beyond anything raised in
the Complaint or the Statement of the Issues in the Case. The statement of
Issue 2 reads “Did Missouri Presbytery clearly err…when it declined to
commence process on any of the following four allegations?” (Emphasis
added.) That is a very different issue than “Is TE Johnson guilty of any of the
following four allegations?” Thus, to reach the conclusion publicly offered by
the dissenters, the SJC would have had to go far beyond the issues raised in
the Complaint.

Further, and more importantly, our Constitution does not allow a higher court
to act on a complaint by declaring someone to be guilty. That is not one of the
remedies available to a higher court in adjudicating a complaint under BCO
43-10, and properly so. A complaint, in our Constitution, is always against the
action of a court. Therefore, the SJC, as the higher court, has no right to sustain
a complaint by declaring an officer guilty. All we can do is act with respect to
the lower court. Were the SJC to seek to declare a man to be guilty, such action
would be the epitome of a higher court “acting for” a lower court in violation
of the principles of BCO 11. Finally, it would be fundamentally unfair to any
man to be judged guilty based on a complaint and without benefit of a trial.
Yet, this is what a straightforward reading of the Dissent would have us do.

Thus, with all due respect for our brothers, we find that key assertions of their
Dissent do not accurately reflect the ruling of the SJC in this Case and are
inconsistent with the Constitution of the PCA. We now turn to the specific
points of error which the Dissent alleges were committed by the SJC.

2.      Answer to Allegations of Procedural Error

The Dissent addresses, at some length, two broad procedural issues: (a) due
diligence, particularly regarding the additional questions posed by the SJC to
Missouri Presbytery and to TE Johnson; and (b) the proper standard for review.
We address each of these in turn.

2A.     Due Diligence

The Dissent alleges “the SJC overlooked the clear deficiencies of Presbytery’s
investigation, which is proven by re-opening the record and admitting
additional information that sought the ‘present’ positions of TE Johnson.”
Indeed, the Dissent’s entire discussion of the SJC’s alleged procedural failures
in this area is tied to the SJC’s decision to reopen the Record and pose some
questions to Presbytery and to TE Johnson. Thus, the Dissent alleges the SJC’s
                                       811
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



action in posing these questions (and particularly our rationale) demonstrated
the SJC had concluded the ROC was unclear and that Presbytery had failed in
its due diligence. (p.1) The Dissent further alleges the citations from the
“supplemental work” suggest Presbytery’s investigation was inadequate.

Additionally, the Dissent alleges these questions led the SJC to focus on
TE Johnson’s “present positions,” apparently defined by the dissenters as his
positions in early 2021, as opposed to his positions during the period in which
Presbytery was conducting the BCO 31-2 investigation (2018-20).

It is important to recognize, first, that the Minutes of the SJC’s meeting on
March 25, 2021, referencing the debate on sending the SJC questions to
Presbytery and TE Johnson, state: “The Parliamentarian advised that this
motion and process were in order.” In addition, this is not the first time the
SJC has suggested or required the provision of additional information.47 Thus,
whether one agrees with the SJC’s course of action, it was based on a ruling
that such action would be in order, and it is an action for which there is
precedent.

        With regard to sending Questions, the Dissent alleges:

        This extension of time to the present and ex post
        facto acquisition of information on the part of the court appears
        to be a misuse of judicial discretion, with the court having
        undertaken more of a pseudo-BCO 31-2 investigation than an
        action to perfect the record. ... Discussions of fairness aside,
        TE Johnson’s present positions are irrelevant to the complaint
        against him. (Dissent p. 2, 3)

We are concerned statements such as this in the Dissent could easily lead
people to conclude there was broad opposition expressed to sending the
Questions. Because SJC discussions and actions relating to sending the
Questions occurred in “closed session,” we don’t feel the liberty to go into
much detail, but we assure the reader such a conclusion would be incorrect.48

47
   For example, see Aven/Dively v. Ohio Valley Presbytery (M44GA at 503-04);
   Barnes v. Heartland Presbytery (M44GA at 480 ff.); Fordice v. Pacific Northwest
   Presbytery (M45GA at 532).
48
   OMSJC 18.3 - “A Closed Session shall be understood as a meeting or portion of a
    meeting wherein only Commissioners, and others specifically invited by the
    Commission, are present. Unlike an Executive Session, however, the proceedings
    shall not be secret, but rather discussion of such matters outside of the meeting
                                        812
                                    APPENDIX T



More importantly, and with no disrespect to our dissenting brothers, we find
that they have arrived at their conclusion by focusing on individual phrases in
the SJC’s explanation for its action, without considering those phrases in the
context of the whole statement. The following is the entirety of the SJC’s
introduction to the list of questions that were sent to the Presbytery and
TE Johnson.

        The SJC believes it is necessary to attempt to clarify the
        Record of the Case because its magnitude (over 600 pages
        covering multiple years of writing, speaking, and judicial
        processes) makes it difficult to ascertain if specific
        representations of perspectives of TE Johnson are his actual or
        present theological convictions. We understand from the
        Record:
            - he has acknowledged some of his perspectives have
              matured over time;
            - he has acknowledged some were poorly stated due to
              time limits, situational pressures, or extemporaneity;
            - some representations of perspectives are made unclear
              by imprecision or disagreement over what aspect of sin
              is being referenced in specific statements;
            - some representations have been extrapolated by critics
              but denied by Johnson.
        Thus, the SJC offers TE Johnson the opportunity to answer
        questions with reference to the specific Allegations in the
        Complaint now before the Commission. Below are 25 questions
        arranged by the Allegations, with a fifth category titled
        “Additional/General.”

It should be clear from that introduction that the SJC’s point in seeking these
clarifications to the Record was not that Missouri Presbytery had failed in its
duty to investigate, but that the large number of reports, investigations, and
writings contained in the Record covered a period of years over which, by his
own admission, some of TE Johnson’s views were poorly stated and some had
“matured.” Further, some of the statements in the Record were ones that were

   shall be at the discretion of each commissioner, and the minutes of such a closed
   session may be read and approved in open session. However, no person present at
   a closed session shall later identify in any manner the views, speeches, or votes of
   a member of the commission during the closed session, apart from that member’s
   written permission.”

                                         813
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



made by TE Johnson’s critics about his views, but which he denied. Thus,
contrary to the conclusions of the Dissent on pp. 1-3, the effort by the SJC to
seek clarifications from TE Johnson and from Missouri Presbytery was not a
reflection on the quality of Missouri Presbytery’s Record or investigative
efforts (although some of us would have liked them to have pressed more
deeply on some issues). Nor was it an effort to develop evidence on views TE
Johnson held in May 2021 but did not hold during the time of Missouri
Presbytery’s investigations (2018-2020). Rather, it was a request to the
minister and Presbytery to pull together and focus pieces of his views that were
scattered throughout the Record and that had, in some instances, undergone
refinement during Presbytery’s investigations.

Further, none of the minister’s answers to SJC questions contradicted his
previous answers to the Presbytery. The Record does not indicate he answered
Presbytery one way but answered the SJC differently. Thus, what the Dissent
refers to as his “present” views are essentially the same as those expressed to
the Presbytery committee, and the Dissent does not identify any conflicting
pair of answers. Even the Complainant’s Addendum Brief recognized that the
answers to the Presbytery investigation committee and to the SJC were
substantively the same, by stating, “TE Johnson’s answers to the SJC questions
elaborate and confirm the very concerns raised in [my] Complaint.” (p. 1). The
Complainant did not contend there were any different answers.

The Dissent concludes its discussion of the BCO 31-2 procedures used by
Presbytery by contending: “If the investigation was inadequate, then
Presbytery’s conclusions constitute “clear error.” (p. 2) But this is a non
sequitur (a conclusion that does not follow from the previous statement).
Investigative procedures and indictment decisions are distinct issues, which is
why the SJC Decision specifies two Issues. Further, as we have explained, the
thrust of the SJC’s action to reopen the Record was not to assert the inadequacy
of the Record or the investigation, but to provide a more focused rehearsal of
TE Johnson’s views that were spread throughout the Record.

2B.        Standard of Review

The Dissent’s second procedural allegation is that the SJC used an improper
standard for review, arguing that the SJC was not bound by the “great
deference” requirement of BCO 39-3.3 “because this is a case centering on
Constitutional interpretation.” (p. 3)49

49
     This was also the claim of the other Dissent, from RE Duncan.

                                          814
                                  APPENDIX T




In considering this concern it is important to recognize there were two Issues
in this Case and they were dealt with differently. In the first Issue: “Did
Presbytery violate BCO 31-2 in the manner of its investigation of the
allegations?” the SJC applied the “clear error standard” of BCO 39-3.3 because
it found that no specific procedures are required by our Constitution in a 31-2
investigation and that the Record demonstrated that Presbytery “sought to
exercise the requisite ‘due diligence and great discretion’ in seeking
explanations from TE Johnson.” (Decision p. 12)

Regarding the second issue: “Did Missouri Presbytery clearly err at its meeting
of July 21, 2020, when it declined to commence process on any of the
following four allegations?” however, the focus is different. We grant that the
Complainant alleged TE Johnson held views that violated the Constitution of
the PCA. Had the Complainant been able to provide evidence that such views
were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, the SJC would have been
obliged to consider questions of “Constitutional interpretation.” But such was
not the case. As we state repeatedly in our ruling, the evidence provided in the
Record and discussed by Complainant did not clearly support the allegation
that Presbytery erred in concluding that there was not a “strong presumption
of guilt” that TE Johnson held the views the Complainant alleged he held.
Thus, for example, and as was stated above, in judging Allegation 1 we wrote:
“If the Record demonstrated that the above statements [of the Complainant]
were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper
to sustain the Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it
was not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not
hold these positions and that he affirms….” In other words, we did not have a
basis for applying BCO 39-3.4 because there was no question of Constitutional
interpretation before us. The evidence in the Record did not provide sufficient
support for the allegations made by Complainant regarding TE Johnson’s
views. Certainly, that is a factual finding with which the dissenters are free to
disagree and argue against. But that is a very different discussion than one of
whether the SJC failed to conclude that Missouri Presbytery had
misinterpreted the Constitution as it reached its conclusions.

3.      Answer to Substantive Concerns Raised by the Dissent

The Dissent alleges “the substantive conclusions reached by Presbytery and
confirmed by the SJC do not follow from the facts in the Record of the case.”
In considering this allegation, it is crucial to begin by understanding the SJC
did not “confirm” any “substantive conclusions” reached by Presbytery. Our
                                      815
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Decision repeatedly states that our Decision is based on the finding that the
Record does not demonstrate the Complainant’s interpretive conclusions of
certain statements were “an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views,” and
thus it was “not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude TE Johnson does not
hold those positions.” It was on that basis that we concluded Presbytery had
not erred in declining to commence formal judicial process against TE
Johnson.

In addition to all the above, we believe the Church would also be aided by an
Answer to two substantive issues raised in the Dissent: (a) the Dissent’s
contention that the Record demonstrates that “homosexuality is central to [TE
Johnson’s] self-perception, his self-presentation, and his ministry;” and (b) the
Dissent’s contention that the Record demonstrates TE Johnson errs in his
understanding of I Corinthians 6:9 and that he is engaged in “heinous sin.” We
address each in turn.

3A.     The Issue of Centrality

The Dissent alleges:

        In his testimony [ROC 610], his sermons [ROC 606], his
        public speeches [ROC 556] and his writings [ROC 812-830]
        TE Johnson has made his homosexuality central to his self-
        perception, his self-presentation, and to his ministry.” (Dissent
        p. 7)

A review of those citations demonstrates the assertion is untenable.
    - ROC 610 is a letter from Covenant Church, Fayetteville, AR to
       Missouri Presbytery, which only has one quoted sentence from the
       minister.
    - ROC 606 is also from Covenant Church and identifies a single sermon
       — May 19, 2019: “Testimony of a Unicorn,” even though there are
       eight years of the minister’s sermons on the Memorial Presbyterian
       Church website.
    - ROC 556 contains excerpts from the same May 2019 sermon and his
       short speech at the 47th GA critiquing Article 7 of the Nashville
       Statement and Overture 4 (which 40% of the GA commissioners also
       voted against).
    - ROC 812-830 contain eight items the minister wrote from May 2019
       through February 2020, which he submitted to the Presbytery’s
       investigating committee at its request. Of the eight items, only the
                                      816
                                 APPENDIX T



        Christianity Today testimony was published. The other seven were
        unpublished private correspondences.

This hardly demonstrates a centrality of self-perception, self-presentation, and
ministry. If there is some other evidence that leads the Dissent to make that
assertion, it was not in the Record, and surely not in the ROC sections cited in
the Dissent.

The minister’s testimony in Christianity Today ends with this statement:

        The gospel doesn’t erase this part of my story so much as it
        redeems it. My sexual orientation doesn’t define me. It’s not
        the most important or most interesting thing about me. It is the
        backdrop for that, the backdrop for the story of Jesus who
        rescued me.

3B.     1 Corinthians 6:9 and Heinousness

We first note that the arguments in the Dissent in this area were not raised
during the SJC debate on the draft Decision proposed by the Drafting
Committee. But even if they had been raised, the Answer below would have
been sufficient to settle them.

The Dissent alleges “some translators [use] the word homosexual to translate
arsenokoitai in 1 Corinthians 6:7-9.” (p. 4) While not explicitly saying so, the
Dissent seems to regard that single word as the best translation of the two
words malakoi and arsenokoitai. This translation decision is very important,
but the Dissent does not identify which translators it references or provide
argument as to why they should be favored over the many others that translate
those two words with a behavioral component. If the word homosexual is
intended throughout the Dissent to be synonymous with malakoi and
arsenokoitai, that would be important to know.

The ESV translates those two words as “men who practice homosexuality.”
The NIV translates it as “men who have sex with men.” The NRSV translates
it as “male prostitutes, sodomites.” The New English Translation renders it as
“passive homosexual partners, practicing homosexuals” and ends its two
lengthy footnotes with: “Since there is a distinction in contemporary usage
between sexual orientation and actual behavior, the qualification “practicing”



                                      817
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



was supplied in the translation, following the emphasis in BDAG.” 50 And
while the NASB translates malakoi and arsenokoitai simply as
“homosexuals,” it also supplies this footnote: “Two Gr[eek] words in the text,
prob.[ably refer to] submissive and dominant male homosexuals.” Thus, even
the NASB recognizes the behavioral component.

In the same section, the Dissent critiques one sentence from the minister’s
answer to Question 12 from Presbytery’s investigative committee, where he
wrote:

            Neither malakoi or arsenokoitai map very tightly onto this
            modern use of gay or homosexual or same-sex attracted as an
            orientation. [ROC 1070]

After quoting the sentence, the Dissent alleges:

            He is saying that the biblical strictures are not closely aligned
            with the “modern” use of the words as an “orientation,” but
            there is no biblical support for arguing that the concepts in
            1 Corinthians 6 are culturally bound. ... TE Johnson’s
            reinterpretation of the meanings of malakoi and arsenokoitai
            through a modern lens to make a distinction related to
            “orientation” does little to clarify the issue from a biblical
            standpoint. (Dissent p. 4)

But it’s not reasonable to draw such a conclusion from the minister’s sentence,
especially in context. Presbytery’s question was this: “How do you understand
1 Cor. 6:9-11 and its application to Christians that identify as celibate gay
Christians?” In his answer, his sentence immediately following the one
quoted in the Dissent says: “These [malakoi and arsenokoitai] speak of sex
acts ... among men. Such men will not enter the kingdom.”

In addition, the minister’s sentence quoted by the Dissent does not say “the
concepts” of 1 Corinthians 6 are “culturally bound.” And the Record does not
demonstrate the minister has “reinterpreted” the meanings of malakoi or
arsenokoitai, but simply recognizes the importance of the behavioral component
in those two words, as do the ESV, NIV, NRSV, NET, NASB, etc. 51

50
     Bauer, Danker, Arndt, and Gingrich (Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament)
51
     The Dissent’s use of the phrase “culturally bound” is itself unclear. Does 'culturally
     bound' mean the text is 'culturally conditioned' (which of course it is) or does it mean
                                              818
                                     APPENDIX T




It is more reasonable to understand the minister’s sentence as highlighting the
difference between the homosexual behaviors indicated by malakoi and
arsenokoitai and the temptations (orientation) of homosexuality. In other
words, it was reasonable for Presbytery to conclude the minister’s sentence
simply affirms someone could be homosexually inclined, but not be malakos
or arsenokoitēs.52
Regarding heinousness, the Dissent also alleges the minister:

         ... appeals to the universality of sin to make the argument that
         same-sex attraction is just like any other sin, while the
         Constitution’s exposition of Scripture asserts that some sins
         are more heinous than others (with homosexuality “more
         heinous” than even inappropriate heterosexual activity by
         virtue of it being against nature).” (p. 5. Emphasis added.)

If the Dissent is intending the word homosexuality in this parenthetical to be
identical with malakoi and arsenokoitai (contra how those Greek words are
understood in this Answer), then we have less concern with the excerpt above.
But the Dissent’s parenthetical seems to use homosexuality in a more general
sense, and if so, it seems to argue homosexual temptations are more heinous
than heterosexual sinful behavior (which appears to be what’s meant by
“inappropriate activity.”) If that’s not what’s being asserted, then it’s hard to
understand why the word “even” is used in the comparison.

Regardless, the Dissent’s contention about the minister’s view is contradicted
by the following statement from the minister quoted in the SJC Decision:

         Sins are not all equally heinous (WLC 150). But they are all
         heinous. Having sex with someone of the same sex is very
         heinous. Before we ever get to the Standards, the Bible is clear
         on this point. For a man to lie with another man as one lies with
         a woman, it is an abomination. Paul picks up the Hebrew of

   that the text is only applicable in Corinth (which the minister clearly denies in his
   answer to the “heinousness” question)?
52
    The minister also addressed 1 Cor. 6:9 in his lengthy answer to Question 7 from the
   Presbytery committee. In one part, he wrote: “The term homosexual is not in the
   Hebrew/Greek Bible. Sexual orientation is a nineteenth century scientific and social
   construct. In 1 Corinthians 6, for example, malakoi and arsenokoitai refer not to
   sexual orientation or temptation but to actual sexual practice between two men.”
   [ROC 1062]
                                          819
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           Leviticus—arsenokoitai, literally “male bed”—to prohibit it in
           no uncertain terms as sin that that will keep a man out of the
           kingdom.

           All other things being equal, I would consider homosexual
           immorality to be more heinous than heterosexual immorality
           on account of the way it further warps God's creational norm
           for sex. As in WLC 151, it goes against the “light of nature.”
           Romans 1 notes it is unnatural. (SJC Decision, p. 26-27)

In addition, the Dissent’s parenthetical assertion would be difficult to
demonstrate biblically and was clearly addressed and critiqued in the 2020
Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Sexuality.53 Below is an excerpt, with
emphasis added.

           Finally, we can discern a very practical value to the distinction
           between the sin that is constituted by our “corruption of
           nature…and all the motions thereof” and the “actual
           transgressions” that proceed from it. ... To feel a sinfully
           disordered sexual attraction (of any kind) is properly to be
           called sin—and all sin, “both original and actual” earns God’s
           wrath (WCF 6.6)—but it is significantly less heinous (using the
           language of the WLC 151) than any level of acting upon it in
           thought or deed. ... (AIC Report p. 23.)

Below are five other pertinent excerpts from the AIC Report. All emphasis
is added.

           Statement 6 (Temptation) ... Nevertheless ... We can avoid
           “entering into” temptation by refusing to internally ponder and
           entertain the proposal and desire to actual sin. Without some
           distinction between (1) the illicit temptations that arise in us
           due to original sin and (2) the willful giving over to actual sin,
           Christians will be too discouraged to “make every effort” at
           growth in godliness and will feel like failures in their necessary
           efforts to be holy as God is holy (2 Peter 1:5-7; 1 Peter 1:14-
           16). (p. 9)


53
     https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-48th-GA-5-28-20-1.pdf


                                          820
                          APPENDIX T



Essay 1: Confessional Foundations Regarding Nature of
Temptation, Sin and Repentance

II.B.1. The Common Dynamic of Concupiscence - First, the
dynamic of spontaneous sinful desire or attraction is not unique
to those who experience homosexual desire. All people
experience it. It is an essential point in the Confession that all
of us who are descended from Adam and Eve experience their
corrupted nature and the complex of disordered affections,
desires, and attractions that come with that corruption. The
danger of this question arising in the context of the discussion
of homosexuality is that some might be tempted to think of that
particular example of disordered desire as qualitatively
different from their own. Or worse, some may be willing to
assert the sinfulness of one category of spontaneous desire but
minimize or remain largely ignorant of the sinful
concupiscence that is common to all.
         The truth is that if we think humbly and carefully about
our own spontaneous thoughts, feelings, and desires, we would
recognize that we are all much more alike than different. ...
Good Reformed teaching on sin places us all on equal footing
in our need of Christ’s imputed righteousness. (p. 21)

II.B.2. Continued Corruption - [To] teach that our sinful
corruption must be entirely removed from any part of us in
order to be considered truly repentant is a spiritually
treacherous perversion of the doctrine of repentance. (p. 21)

II.B.5. Moral Difference - ... Our brothers and sisters who resist
and repent of enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are
powerful examples to us all of what this “daily mortification”
looks like in “the best of believers.” We should be encouraged
and challenged by their example and eager to join in fellowship
with them for the mutual strengthening of our faith, hope, and
love. (p. 23)

Essay 2: Biblical Perspectives for Pastoral Care - Discipleship,
Identity and Terminology Singleness, Friendship, Community
- Insofar as such persons display the requisite Christian
maturity, we do not consider this sin struggle automatically to


                              821
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        disqualify someone for leadership in the church (1 Cor 6:9-11,
        1 Tim 3:1-7, Titus 1:6-9; 2 Pet 1:3-11) (p. 31)

Conclusion

         While appreciating our dissenting brothers’ zeal for truth, and their
evident desire to promote the peace and purity of the Church, we believe, as
we have shown above, that their Dissent does not accurately reflect either the
Record in this Case or the ruling and opinion of the SJC. Unfortunately, it is
likely that as these inaccuracies are spread in the Church, people will follow
the dissenters in drawing conclusions about the SJC’s ruling and its
understanding of sexual ethics that are neither accurate nor fairly adduced
from the Decision. It is for this reason that we find it necessary to provide this
Answer.


                     CASE NO. 2021-12
                     COMPLAINT OF
       CHRISTIAN MICHELSON AND STUART MICHELSON
                            v.
            NORTHWEST GEORGIA PRESBYTERY
                      February 1, 2022

The Complaint is not judicially in order, and the defect cannot be cured within
the Rules of Discipline of the BCO; therefore, the case is dismissed. OMSJC
10.5-6.

RATIONALE

The Complaint as presented to the Session does not identify any act of that
court alleged to be in error, thus failing to meet the standard set forth in BCO
43-1, “A complaint is a written representation made against some act or
decision of a court of the Church. It is the right of any communing member of
the Church in good standing to make complaint against any action of a court
to whose jurisdiction he is subject. . .” (emphasis added). (See also BCO 43-
10, “The higher court has power, in its discretion, to annul the whole or any
part of the action of a lower court against which complaint has been
made. . . .” (emphasis added.) According to the ROC, the only act of the
Midway Session with respect to the congregation meeting in question is that
of the Session meeting of July 8, 2020: The act of calling a congregational
meeting (ROC 217). That action is not objected to in the Complaint. Further,
the congregational meeting of July 19, 2020 (ROC 226-252), afforded the
                                       822
