                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                           CASE NO. 2020-05
                           TE RYAN SPECK
                                  v.
                        MISSOURI PRESBYTERY
                       DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                             March 3, 2022

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

In July 2018, Memorial Presbyterian Church (PCA) (“Memorial”) in St. Louis
hosted the first Revoice Conference (“Revoice 18”). Thereafter, several
individuals, sessions, and presbyteries communicated concerns to Memorial
and to Missouri Presbytery (“MOP” or “Presbytery”) regarding Revoice 18.
In light of these concerns, in October 2018 the pastor of Memorial, TE Greg
Johnson, and its Session requested that MOP accept, as a BCO 41 Reference,
the Session’s request to investigate it with regard to the allegations pertaining
to the hosting of Revoice 2018. MOP voted to approve a lengthy report issued
by its investigative committee in May 2019. The report contained, among
other things, nine theological judgments. Complainant complained against
MOP’s adoption of the nine theological judgments in July 2019. MOP
partially sustained his complaint in October 2019 and voted to reconsider its
affirmation of the nine theological judgments at a future called meeting.
Complainant unsuccessfully tried to add a question about adoption by gay
couples and individuals to the matters to be considered at the future meeting.

In December 2019, at a meeting called to reconsider the nine theological
judgments, Complainant raised a point of order concerning the procedures
used by MOP’s Administrative Committee in preparation for the meeting, but
Presbytery’s Moderator ruled the point of order not well taken, a ruling that
was sustained after challenge. MOP reconsidered the nine theological
judgments and adopted amended statements to eight of them, referring the
ninth judgment to an ad hoc committee for reconsideration. In January 2020,
Complainant complained against MOP’s actions at the December 2019
meeting, a Complaint which Presbytery denied in July 2020. Complainant
then carried his complaint to the SJC. The Panel conducted the hearing on
September 14, 2021 and recommended that the Complaint be denied. The full
SJC reviewed the case on March 3, 2022 and approved the following decision
to sustain the Complaint in part and to deny it in part.




                                      826
                                APPENDIX T



I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

07/26/18   Memorial hosted the three-day Revoice 2018 conference.

09/07/18   The Session of Covenant PCA, Harrisonburg, VA sent a seven-
           page letter to the Memorial Session regarding Memorial’s
           involvement in Revoice 2018.

09/27/18   TE Andrew Dionne sent a letter to the Memorial Session, which
           was co-signed by 20 other PCA TEs. (At the time, TE Dionne was
           pastor of Trinity PCA in Spartanburg, SC. Trinity and TE Dionne
           left the PCA in May 2019 to affiliate with the non-PCA “Evangel
           Presbytery.”) Among other things, the letter exhorted Memorial
           Session “to repent of [their] sin of promoting and hosting the 2018
           Revoice Conference.”

10/10/18   TE Johnson and Session of Memorial sent a letter to MOP
           requesting Presbytery, among other things, to accept, as a BCO 41
           Reference, the Session’s request for Presbytery to investigate it
           with regard to the allegations pertaining to hosting Revoice 2018.

10/16/18   At a Stated Meeting, MOP’s Administrative Committee
           announced that “Presbytery had received a request for reference
           from Memorial Presbyterian’s Session due to complaints the
           church has received due to the Revoice Conference” and that the
           Committee Chairman “had formed an investigative committee
           [hereinafter, “Committee to Investigate Memorial,” or “CIM”]
           chaired by TE Ron Lutjens.”

10/25/18   Calvary Presbytery sent a 9-page letter to MOP.

11/13/18   Southwest Florida Presbytery sent a 12-page letter to MOP.

01/15/19   At a Stated Meeting, MOP heard the CIM report on its progress.
           Presbytery referred all letters pertaining to Revoice to CIM
           (including the letters already sent from Calvary Presbytery and
           Southwest Florida Presbytery).

01/26/19   Savannah River Presbytery sent a one-page letter to MOP
           supporting the October 2018 letter from Calvary Presbytery.


                                    827
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



 05/18/19 At a Called Meeting, MOP considered the 115-page CIM report,
          which had been previously distributed by email. MOP voted to
          approve the concluding statements and nine theological
          judgments (“9 Theological Judgments”).

07/08/19    TE Ryan Speck filed a complaint with Presbytery regarding the 9
            Theological Judgments. (This is not the complaint later carried to
            the SJC; this is a separate complaint that was not carried forward.)

07/11/19    TE Greg Johnson and Memorial Session sent a two-page letter to
            Presbytery responding to the May 2019 CIM Report.

07/16/19    At a Stated Meeting, MOP appointed a committee to respond to
            Memorial Session’s July 11 letter and appointed a Complaint
            Review Committee (“CRC1”), composed of TEs Polski, Porter
            and York and REs Myers and Lauerman, to review TE Speck’s
            July 8 Complaint.

10/15/19    At its Stated Meeting, MOP considered the thirty-page CRC1
            Report, which recommended sustaining part of the Complaint, as
            follows: “The finding of the CRC is that the MOP did err by
            failing to judge Revoice 18 for advancing positions contrary to the
            scriptures and our confessional standards and therefore we
            recommend that this aspect of the complaint be sustained.” MOP
            partially sustained TE Speck’s July 2019 complaint and voted to
            reconsider its affirmation of the 9 Theological Judgments at a
            future called meeting. TE Speck moved to put the following
            question on the December 7, 2019, called meeting docket: “Did
            Revoice 18 err by encouraging gay couples and gay individuals to
            adopt children, and, if so, is this a serious error that [MOP] needs
            publicly to correct and clearly warn against?” MOP voted against
            this motion. Presbytery also created an ad hoc study committee to
            create a short statement of affirmations and denials regarding
            human sexuality (hereafter, “A&D Committee.”)

10/18/2019 TE Speck emailed the MOP’s Moderator, TE Tim LeCroy, asking
           him to consider adding to the docket of the December 7, 2019,
           called meeting the gay adoption question requested on October 15,
           to be discussed alongside the 9 Theological Judgments.



                                      828
                                APPENDIX T



11/30/2019 MOP’s Stated Clerk emailed members of MOP, with documents
           attached, to prepare members for the December 7, 2019, meeting
           of MOP which had been called to reconsider the 9 Theological
           Judgments.

12/07/2019 At the called meeting, TE Speck raised a point of order objecting
           to some of the procedures of MOP’s Administrative Committee
           as out of order. MOP’s Moderator ruled TE Speck’s point of order
           not well taken; after a challenge to the ruling, MOP voted to
           sustain the ruling.       MOP reconsidered the 9 Theological
           Judgments and adopted amended statements to eight of them,
           referring one question to an ad hoc committee to reconsider the
           question of “Queer Treasure.” (Judgment 7) The newly amended
           and adopted statements included both affirmation and criticism of
           parts of Revoice 18. MOP authorized its Administrative
           Committee to draft a letter communicating these changes.

01/03/20   TE Speck filed a Complaint with MOP against MOP’s actions
           taken at the December 7, 2019, meeting (this is the Complaint
           which later became the basis of Case 2020-05) alleging the
           following errors:

           1. Approval of Theological Judgments 1-5 and 9 of the "MOP
              Presbytery Ad Hoc Committee to Investigate Memorial
              Presbyterian Church for Hosting the Revoice 18 Conference
              in July 2018" (CIM), which Complainant contends are
              contrary to the Scriptures and to the Confessional Standards
              of the Presbyterian Church in America; and

           2. Denial of TE Speck's point of order regarding the Administrative
              Committee's (AdCom) handling of the December 7, 2019,
              meeting; and

           3. Refusal to debate and rule on the propriety of gay couples
              adopting children, as advanced at Revoice 18.

           Below are the six MOP Judgments complained against in the first
              item of TE Speck’s Complaint.

           1. We concur with the CIM’s judgment that the evidence does
              not demonstrate the allegation that Revoice 18 grounded
                                    829
       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    homoerotic desire and actions in Creation rather than in the
    Fall, thereby advocating for a position contrary to Scripture
    and our confession of faith, and one grave and serious enough
    that it needs to be repudiated by Memorial.

2. We concur that terms like “gay,” “sexual orientation,” “queer,”
   “sexual minorities,” etc., are not always or necessarily
   unbiblical; and therefore, that Revoice 18’s use of the
   terminology in question, though confusing to some and
   potentially unwise, was not a grave and serious doctrinal
   error.

3. We concur with the CIM’s judgment that the evidence was
   such that this question as to whether a “gay beneath the gay”
   exists could not have been judged to be a key teaching of
   Revoice, but continues have the potential for becoming a
   grave and serious error if it begins to play a more central role,
   and thus we exhort those involved with Revoice to consider
   our position on this matter.

4. We concur with CIM and deny that it is always a grave and
   serious error worthy of repudiation to claim something which
   can be traced to our sin nature as in any sense a part of our
   “identity,” of part of “who we are,” as Revoice does with
   being SSA. While enduring patterns of brokenness and sin
   remain part of “who we are,” of our “identity,” as children of
   Adam, nevertheless sinful desires and deeds must be put to
   death. We concur that the core question is not: “Is that which
   rises from sin part of who you are?” but rather: “What are you
   doing with all the broken parts and places of who you are?”

5. We concur that (i) celibate SSA believers face complex
   barriers in developing friendships with people of the same
   gender and that, (ii) Christians must labor to empathize with
   this difficulty and that, (iii) it was unwise and hence an error
   of judgment rather than an error striking at the vitals of
   religion for Revoice leaders to be entertaining publicly the
   possibility of celibate partnerships without more careful
   boundaries proposed and that, (iv) TE Johnson adequately
   warned about the dangers of these type of friendships in his
   own Revoice 18 talk.
                          830
                               APPENDIX T




           9. We concur with the CIM’s judgment that although Memorial
              erred in failing to make clear to their congregation our
              doctrinal differences with Roman Catholicism before and
              after the Revoice 18 conference, it did not err in allowing
              Roman Catholics to speak in their church building under the
              aegis of Revoice, an outside organization, and therefore did
              not act in such a way as to strike at the vitals of religion.

01/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, MOP referred TE Speck’s Jan. 2020 Complaint
           to a new Complaint Review Committee (“CRC2”) composed of
           TEs Polski, TE Dey, RE Jones and RE Bauer. In addition,
           Presbytery discussed a draft from the A&D Committee.

06/02/20   At a called meeting, Presbytery adopted the 49 Affirmations and
           Denials proposed in its A&D Committee Report. A&D Members
           included TEs Dan Doriani, Mark Dalbey, and Ryan Laughlin, and
           RE Sean Maney. The 8-page Report was posted at:
           https://drive.google.com/file/d/197ZR63Fg_TCwOswHjjz7Il2Ja
           F1O7mjI/view.

           The 49 A&D’s were in two Parts:

           1. Concise Biblical Theology of Sexuality with Reference to
              Homosexuality (1-28).
           2. Homosexuality and Identity in Current Debate (29-49).
07/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, MOP considered the forty-page CRC2
           Report, which recommended denying all the specifications of
           error in the Complaint, but also recommended revising
           Theological Judgments 2 (Terminology) and 5 (Spiritual
           Friendships). Presbytery declined the Committee’s proposed
           revision to Judgment 2 and adopted its recommended revision to
           Judgment 5. Presbytery then denied TE Speck’s January 3, 2020,
           Complaint. It also heard the report of the Committee to Reconsider
           Queer Treasure (the one of the 9 Theological Judgments not
           approved on December 7, 2019), voting to find fault with this
           lecture given at Revoice 18.

7/23/2020 TE Speck carried his January 3, 2020, Complaint to the General
          Assembly (Case 2020-05).


                                    831
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



9/14/2021 The Panel (Chairman RE John Pickering, Secretary TE Paul
          Bankson, RE Dan Carrell, and Alternates RE John Bise and TE
          David Coffin) conducted the hearing.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

   1   At its December 7, 2019, Called Meeting, did Missouri Presbytery
       (MOP) err in approving six theological judgments (specifically,
       Judgments # 1-5 and #9) recommended by CIM (Committee to
       Investigate Memorial)? Complainant’s specifications of errors
       concern:

       MOP Theological Judgment 1 (“Origins of Homoerotic Desire”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 2 (“Terminology”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 3 (“The Gay Beneath the Gay”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 4 (“Gay Identity”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 5 (“Spiritual Friendship”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 9 (“Roman Catholic Speakers”)

   2. Did the MOP err when it acted to deny TE Speck's point of order
      regarding the Administrative Committee's handling of the December
      7, 2019 meeting?

   3. Did the MOP err when it acted to refuse to debate and rule on the
      propriety of gay couples adopting children, as Complainant suggests
      was advanced at Revoice 18?

III. JUDGMENTS

   1. Yes, particularly with regard to MOP Theological Judgments 2, 3,
      and 5.
   2. No.
   3. No.

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

A. Issue 1 –Did Missouri Presbytery err in approving the Committee to
   Investigate Memorial’s (CIM) Theological Allegations and
   Judgments on #1-5 and #9?



                                  832
                                      APPENDIX T



Missouri Presbytery erred when it approved Judgments # 1-5 and #9 of CIM.
Two matters account for Presbytery’s error. The first is that MOP employed
incorrect criteria for review in adjudicating the allegations presented within
the Complaint. The second is that MOP failed to act properly in light of what
it found based even on those incorrect criteria. This is reflected in its actions
on Theological Judgments #1-5, #9, and considered in light of the findings of
CIM and the Complaint Review Committee (CRC). The matter of the incorrect
criteria for review and the matter of MOP’s failure to act properly will be
reviewed in turn.

MOP’s Criteria for Review

On December 7, 2019, at the recommendation of its Committee to Investigate
Memorial (CIM), MOP adopted eight “Theological Judgments.” TE Ryan
Speck filed Complaint against six of these Judgments (Theological Judgments
#1-5, #9).54 In presenting these recommendations, CIM employed criteria for
review that it explicitly articulated in its committee report. CIM urged that “the
core principles of justice enumerated in BCO Chapter 34 ought to govern …
the Memorial Session’s role in their decision to host Revoice 18; and … those
principles should also govern our assessment of the theological teachings of
Revoice, as we found them in the talks of the Revoice 18 speakers and in their
writings and teachings in other venues”. CIM further appealed to the
“stipulations in BCO 40.5” as “relevant … to this situation…”. BCO 40-5,
CIM reasoned, “seems to have in view not simply doctrinal teaching of
ministers that may be erroneous or divisive (which seems to be the focus of
BCO 34.5), but any and all ‘constitutional’ breaches that a lower court may
have committed.” CIM therefore argued that they were to make a
determination whether “the Memorial elders and pastor [are] guilty of an
important delinquency and/or a grossly unconstitutional proceeding in
allowing the outside group, Revoice, to use its facilities for its conference” (
emphasis in original). Any alleged errors could “not simply [be] errors, but
errors so serious that they strike at the vitals of religion (in faith or morals)
AND as well, are industriously spread (emphasis in original). Thus, CIM
declared that “in our process we considered BCO chapters 29, 34, and 40 in
determining whether either Revoice or Memorial committed errors that strike
at the vitals of religion or simply errors resulting from the weakness of human
understanding.”

54
     CIM presented nine Theological Judgments to MOP. On December 7, 2019, MOP
     adopted eight of those Theological Judgments, and referred a ninth to a committee
     of Presbytery. TE Speck filed complaint against six of the remaining eight
     Theological Judgments.
                                          833
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



CIM’s recommendations to Presbytery with respect to Theological Judgments
#1-5, #9 contain language explicitly reflecting these criteria – “grave and
serious” (#1, #2, #3, #4), “error of judgment rather than an error striking at the
vitals of religion” (#5), “strike at the vitals of religion” (#9). Since Presbytery
adopted each of these motions, it thereby employed, whether intentionally or
not, CIM’s standard in assessing the teachings of Revoice 18 that were before
it.55

But, in doing so, CIM and Presbytery conflated the language of BCO 34 and
40 into a single criterion. By so doing, they defined “any important
delinquency or grossly unconstitutional proceedings” from BCO 40-5 as
consisting only of “Heresy and schism...that strike at the vitals of religion and
are industriously spread” as set forth in BCO 34-5. This is, however, an
inaccurate reading of BCO 40-5 and thus was an erroneous criterion for MOP
to apply to the teachings of Revoice. In conflating the language of BCO 34
and 40, CIM and Presbytery crafted a criterion for assessing the actions of
courts of the PCA that is based on the Constitutional standard to be used when
undertaking process against a teaching elder. There is no Constitutional reason
that the latter should define the former. BCO 34 governs “special rules
pertaining to process against a minister.” But the teachings in question at
Revoice 18 were not being taught exclusively by member teaching elders of
MOP. The individuals teaching at Revoice 18 were both officers and non-
officers, within the PCA and outside the PCA. There is no Constitutional
reason why the standard articulated in BCO 34-5 should have been applied
beyond its narrow scope, that is, process concerning a PCA teaching elder.
Further, in creating this new criterion CIM and MOP apparently overlooked
Constitutional material regarding the responsibilities of the courts of the PCA
that should have guided their application of BCO 40-5 to this matter.

The proper Constitutional criteria to be applied in matters arising under BCO
40-5 are those found at BCO 11-3,4 and at BCO 13-9(f) which deal with the
responsibilities of courts. BCO 11-4 affirms that “every court has the right to
resolve questions of doctrine and discipline seriously and reasonably
proposed, and in general to maintain truth and righteousness, condemning
erroneous opinions and practices which tend to the injury of the peace, purity,
or progress of the church.” BCO 11-3 permits “disputed matters of doctrine
and order arising in the lower courts” to be “referred to the higher courts for

55
     In several places in this Reasoning, for the sake of brevity, we use the phrases,
     “the teachings of Revoice 18” or “the teachings of Revoice.” By those phrases we
     mean the teaching of some of the speakers at the Revoice 18 Conference.

                                           834
                                  APPENDIX T



decision,” while BCO 13-9(f). enumerates among the powers of Presbytery,
“to condemn erroneous opinions which injure the purity or peace of the
Church.” BCO 11-3 affirms, then, that when “disputed matters of doctrine” are
Constitutionally brought from a lower court to a higher court, then the higher
court may lawfully render “decision” with respect to those matters. BCO 13-
9(f) articulates the proper criteria for evaluation. If an “opinion” is not only
“erroneous” but also “injure[s] the purity or peace of the Church,” then
Presbytery may lawfully “condemn” that opinion.

MOP’s Findings

The Findings of MOP

The importance of applying the proper Constitutional criteria surfaces when
we consider Presbytery’s motions with respect to the Theological Judgments
that are the subject of this Complaint. The motions that MOP adopted with
respect to these Theological Judgments reflect some measure of concern
relating to teachings of Revoice 18 –

        Revoice 18’s use of the terminology in question, though
        confusing to some and potentially unwise, was not a grave and
        serious doctrinal error” (Theological Judgment #2).

        We concur with the CIM’s judgment that the evidence was
        such that this question as to whether a ‘gay beneath the gay’
        exists could not have been judged to be a key teaching of
        Revoice, but continues to have the potential for becoming a
        grave and serious error if it begins to play a more central role,
        and thus we exhort those involved with Revoice to consider
        our position on this matter (Theological Judgment #3).

        We concur that i) celibate SSA believers face complex barriers
        in developing friendships with people of the same gender and
        that, ii) Christians must labor to empathize with this difficulty
        and that, iii) it was unwise and hence an error of judgment
        rather than an error striking at the vitals of religion for Revoice
        leaders to be entertaining publicly the possibility of celibate
        partnerships without more careful boundaries proposed and
        that, iv) TE Johnson adequately warned about the dangers of
        these type of friendships in his own Revoice 18 talk.
        (Theological Judgment #5)
                                       835
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Importantly, the language of concern in the motions cited above was left in
place by the findings of a subsequent committee, the Second Speck Complaint
Review Committee [CRC2], and the actions of MOP on the July 21, 2020
recommendations of that committee.

Although MOP registered concern with respect to the teachings of Revoice 18
in view in Theological Judgments 2, 3, and 5, it declined to take further action
than it did. MOP unnecessarily restrained itself by the incorrect criteria for
review that it opted to follow in evaluating the teachings of Revoice 18.
Consequently, it did not take adequate action with respect to the errors that it
had identified (Theological Judgments 3, 5), and with respect to teachings that
it identified as “confusing to some and potentially unwise” (Theological
Judgment 2).

The Findings of Committees of MOP

Significantly, the committees of MOP (CIM, CRC) registered greater concern
in their findings than did MOP in its adopted Judgments. Consider first the
findings of CIM. With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological
Judgment 2, CIM noted, “we do agree that the way Revoice and Side B
believers in general use terms has been confusing to many in our churches, and
we expressed regret that they were not more sensitive to this confusion”;
“These terms [“like ‘gay,’ ‘sexual orientation,’ ‘queer,’ and ‘sexual
minorities’”] [have] potential to cause offense and division within the church”;
and “We sincerely wish that Revoice leaders would have had a greater sense
of the responsibility they carry to explain their use of terms more fully to the
church they profess to need.” Compare the subsequent and confirmatory
finding of CRC2, “some of these terms [‘gay,’ ‘sexual orientation,’ ‘queer,’
‘sexual minorities’] may well have been used at Revoice 18 in such a way in
which they were inconsistent, unwise and confusing to many observers of the
conference, thereby contributing to the disturbance of the peace of the church.”

With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological Judgment 3, CIM
noted, “The use of terms such as ‘same-sex-attracted’ or ‘gay’ in the way
Revoice 18 and many Side B people use them … indulges in needless and
potentially dangerous speculation”; “If one takes these terms the way that
Revoice and many Side B people take them … then the allegation is true that
Revoice has committed at least an error of imprudence by indulging in
needless and potentially dangerous speculation, and it remains to be seen
whether this error will be used in such a way as to strike at the vitals of
religion”; “Revoice leaders and speakers do use terms that historically were
                                      836
                                   APPENDIX T



synonymous with ‘homoerotic desire’ in a way that expands them to include
morally good features that are claimed to be underneath or behind the illicit
sexual desires. These terms include ‘homosexual,’ ‘same sex attraction,’ ‘gay,’
and ‘homosexual attraction.’ This leads them to say that not everything about
‘being gay’ or ‘same-sex-attracted’ has to do with sinful sexual desires”; “[the
danger is that] this speculation [regarding morally benign qualities tied to
homoerotic desire] appears to us to be the prospect of this becoming a central
plank in the thinking and approach of some of Revoice’s leaders” ; and “We
feel constrained to warn against any expansion of the terms ‘same-sex-
attraction’ and ‘being gay’ with its creation of a category of ‘gayness,’
understood as a way of experiencing the world. This seems to us to be a
potentially dangerous error of speculation; yet we cannot say with unwavering
confidence that we believe it to be an error so serious and obviously destructive
of good morals and sound doctrine that we judge it to be an error which ‘strikes
at the vitals of religion’ in the areas of doctrine and morals. We do believe it to
be at least a lesser error of indulging in necessary and potentially dangerous
speculation, something we are warned against as believers (see 1 Timothy 1:3-4).”

With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological Judgment 5, CIM
noted, “we concluded that entertaining celibate partnerships was unwise – at
least to whatever degree they were being given serious consideration. CIM
regarded this as an error of judgment and not of doctrine…” (emphasis in
original); “[I]t is … our judgment that, to the extent that Revoice event
entertains the possibility of ‘celibate partnerships’ … it has erred in offering
unwise, unedifying relational arrangements to SSA Christians (cf. 1 Cor.
6:12)”; and “[W]e … believe that [Revoice] are open to the danger of a
preoccupation with technical boundaries on physical limits in friendships to
the neglect of the deeper inner dynamic involved in SSA romantic coupling,
and the way it mimics the longing and the personal pull toward the other person
that draws a man and woman together toward an exclusive intimacy that is
designed by God to move them toward marriage.”

With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological Judgment 4, MOP
concluded, “We concur with CIM and deny that it is always a grave and serious
error worthy of repudiation to claim something which can be traced to our sin
nature as in any sense a part of our ‘identity,’ of [sic] part of ‘who we are,’ as
Revoice does with being SSA. While enduring patterns of brokenness and sin
remain part of ‘who we are,’ of our ‘identity,’ as children of Adam,
nevertheless sinful desires and deeds must be put to death. We concur that the
core question is not: ‘Is that which rises from sin part of who you are?” but
rather: “What are you doing with all the broken parts and places of who you
                                       837
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



are?” But CIM’s findings with respect to Theological Judgment 4 raised
concerns that MOP’s action did not: “[W]e believe that the language of ‘gay
Christian’ … poses a particularly challenging problem for both the Revoice
project and its critics. We encourage Revoice and those who would adopt such
language to do so with great care, recognizing its potential to cause offense
and division within the church.”

Consider next the findings of CRC. The Complaint Review Committee (CRC),
which was appointed to hear an earlier (July, 2019) complaint of TE Speck
against actions of MOP taken on recommendation of its CIM, registered
particular concerns with Revoice 18. As to same-sex friendships, “The
majority on the CRC along with the CIM itself … were very concerned with
this way [i.e. the way advocated at Revoice 18] of applying the truths that are
in this passage [i.e., 1 Sam 18:3, Ruth 1:16-17] and concluded that applying
texts in this manner was a significant hermeneutical error that needed to be
clearly corrected and warned against by the MOP and MPC.” As to a particular
speaker’s specific statement with respect to gay orientation – “Without
wishing to disparage the speaker whatsoever (who herself acknowledged that
she was engaging intentionally in speculation) the CRC nonetheless must
conclude that, in this confined moment, speculations were put forward that
caused damage to the peace and purity of the church and possibly to the souls
of her members.” As to so-called gay culture, “The CRC concurs with
complainant’s concerns, based primarily on the language of WCF 20-1 and its
supporting proof texts, that [a Revoice speaker] went too far in suggesting that
believers in Christ should closely identify with and willfully associate
themselves with even the so-called ‘non-homoerotic’ aspects of
LGBQT/Queer Culture and in so doing did indeed make assertions that ‘struck
at the vitals of religion.’” As to use of language, “We … believe that some of
the terms being used are so provocative and so widely misunderstood that
believers ought to be extraordinarily careful in their use and perhaps even
refrain from using them at all, especially when speaking in public venues.”

CRC no less registered broad concern with the way in which Revoice 18 had
disrupted the church. In its October, 2019 report to Presbytery, CRC
acknowledged that “the peace of the church … had been highly disturbed by
some aspects of what was said at the Revoice 18 conference”; [W]e judge that
some of the matters of controversy at Revoice 18 were of … a variety of error
(whether they be errors “arising from the weakness of human understanding”
or “striking at the vitals”), … widely misunderstood by the wider church and



                                      838
                                     APPENDIX T



… damaging to the peace of the church;56 “there was such grave confusion in
the church about what some of the speakers at Revoice 18 meant by what they
were saying that it became incumbent on the MOP to be more clear about its
own views in those areas where the confusion was greatest.”

The failure of MOP to deal properly with the issues raised in the Complaint is
magnified by two additional points. First, the concerning teachings did not
occur in isolation. In other words, it was not a situation where one individual
made a concerning statement on one day in one area of the Presbytery, while
another individual offered a different concerning statement on a separate issue
on another day in another part of the Presbytery, while a third individual made
a concerning statement on yet another issue in yet another part of the
Presbytery. All of the statements cited in the Complaint and in the various
reports of MOP committees and commissions were made at the same
Conference dealing with the same general topic. Thus, it is most reasonable
to judge the level of error and level of potential harm by considering the
cumulative impact of the errors and concerns across the whole of the
Conference. In disposing of the allegations by dealing with each one as a
separate entity and stating, in essence, that if there was an error in the specific
area it was only minor, MOP apparently missed the fact that the cumulative
impact of those errors could and did add up to a major concern.

Second, while MOP did take action to try to make sure that the Congregation
of Memorial Presbyterian Church was alerted to possible errors and that steps
were taken to mitigate the possible harm to the peace and purity of that
Congregation as a result of those errors, it is not evident that MOP dealt
appropriately with its responsibility to take similar steps with regard to the
broader Church. Certainly, the question of the breadth of impact of erroneous
teachings at Revoice 18 was raised with the Presbytery. Significantly, the
chair of CIM declared to MOP in January, 2019 “his sorrow over his own
passivity in failing to ask Presbytery … to get involved in the Revoice
controversy, especially after it was over, when our brothers at Memorial could
have benefitted from our counsel, encouragement, and inquiry, and when it
ought to have been clear to him that the controversy was proving to be so
divisive and widespread that it virtually constrained Presbytery’s
involvement.” Similarly, the communications from various individuals and
courts throughout the Denomination gave indication that the peace and purity
of the broader church were being impacted. Yet, while MOP was, commendably,

56
     The CRC makes this statement of its comment that MOP was hasty in its action in
     May, 2019. MOP, in October, 2019 “rescinded” its May, 2019 action and called a
     December, 2019 meeting to “reconsider the nine judgments of the CIM.”
                                         839
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



willing to interact with those communications, there is no evidence that
Presbytery clearly stated to the broader church that it recognized the errors that
were taught at Revoice 18 and the impact of those teachings. Further, it is not
clear that Presbytery sought to do what it could to mitigate the impact of those
erroneous teachings on the peace and purity of the Church. We recognize that
this lack of response by MOP may well have come about because of their use
of the incorrect criteria as discussed above, but that does not change the fact
that MOP did not do what it needed to do to protect the peace and purity of the
broader Church, particularly in light of the responsibilities set forth in BCO
11-3, 4.57

The Record shows, therefore, that more than one committee of Presbytery
acknowledged multiple teachings at Revoice 18 to have been erroneous in
themselves and disruptive to the peace of the Church. Similar concerns were
registered about the conference as a whole. MOP adopted language that, if
anything, was milder and weaker than statements (cited above) appearing in
its committees’ reports to Presbytery. But even so, Presbytery adopted
language that, according to the Constitutional criteria set forth in BCO 11-3, 4
and 13-9(f), required it to take action that it neglected to take.

B. Issue 2 –Did Missouri Presbytery err when it acted to deny a point of
   order regarding its December 7, 2019, meeting?

Complainant argues that MOP violated its own standing rules when its Stated
Clerk circulated materials prepared by MOP’s Administrative Committee in
advance of the December 7, 2019, meeting. According to Complainant,
MOP’s Standing Rule 8.3.C. limits the Administrative Committee to a purely
administrative role; it is “specifically forbidden to institute new work.”
Complainant argues that the portion of the materials circulated comprised of
what the Stated Clerk described in his email to the members of Presbytery as


57
     BCO 11-3, “When … according to Scriptural example, and needful to the purity and
     harmony of the whole Church, disputed matters of doctrine and order arising in the
     lower courts are referred to the higher courts for decision…” BCO 11-4, “Every
     court has the right to resolve questions of doctrine and discipline seriously and
     reasonably proposed, and in general to maintain truth and righteousness,
     condemning erroneous opinions and practices, which tend to the injury of the peace,
     purity, or progress of the Church …. These courts are not separate and independent
     tribunals, but they have a mutual relation, and every act of jurisdiction is the act of
     the whole Church performed by it through the appropriate organ.”


                                             840
                                  APPENDIX T



“briefs on the nine theological questions we will be considering” constituted
impermissible “new work.” Complainant also objects to the characterization
of the briefs by the Stated Clerk as having been prepared by “[t]he CIM in
conjunction with the Administrative Committee” because the CIM had been
dismissed with thanks by MOP some six months earlier. Complainant finds
the latter matter particularly irksome because Complainant was himself a
member of the CIM, and he was not invited to participate in the preparation of
the briefs. Finally, to add insult to injury, “select CIM members were allowed
the last 5 minutes of each debate time in order to speak for approval of each of
the 9 Judgments.” Complainant raised a point of order concerning these
matters at the beginning of the December 6, 2019, meeting, but the Moderator
ruled it not well taken, and his ruling survived a challenge by vote of the
Presbytery.

Since the facts are not disputed, the question or whether MOP’s actions
violated its Standing Rules is a pure question of law, but unlike the other
questions of law in this case, it is not a question to be decided under the PCA’s
Constitution. It is, instead, a question to be decided under MOP’s Standing
Rules, and the leading authority on that subject, MOP, has already ruled. It is
not the place of the SJC to instruct MOP on what its own Standing Rules mean.
In any case, by voting to uphold the Moderator’s ruling, MOP set aside any
violation of its Standing Rules by effectively modifying them for purposes of
the materials circulated by the Moderator. We will not disturb that decision.

It is possible, of course, that MOP’s actions also violated the BCO, and we do
have the authority and responsibility to interpret and apply the BCO without
deferring to MOP’s interpretation. The BCO contains no “new work”
prohibition for administrative committees generally, so that part of
Complainant’s argument fails to advance. But the BCO does contain clear
rules for the appointment and dismissal of committees. To that extent, the
Stated Clerk’s email was in error; the briefs were not prepared by the CIM at
all, as the CIM no longer existed. However, they were evidently prepared by
men who had been members of the CIM and who had evidently voted in the
majority on the CIM concerning the CIM’s report. Had the Stated Clerk’s
email described the briefs as being prepared by “men who were members of
the CIM in conjunction with the [Administrative Committee],” Complainant
would have had no basis to object regarding the CIM reference. It strains
credulity, however, to believe that presbyters’ votes on the 9 Theological
Judgments were swayed by the mistaken impression that the full CIM had
participated in the preparation of the briefs rather than some of its members
who supported the CIM’s report, particularly since Complainant brought the
                                      841
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



inaccuracy of the Stated Clerk’s email to the attention of the Presbytery at the
beginning of the meeting. We conclude that the Stated Clerk’s error was
harmless error as to the outcome of the vote, although understandably it was
not harmless to the feelings of the Complainant. It appears to be an error of
the type for which a personal apology would be appropriate, and which should
be accepted absent evidence of malice on the part of the Stated Clerk, which
Complainant has not alleged. Finally, there is the issue of permitting former
members of the CIM to have the last 5 minutes in debate. Presbyteries are free
to structure debate on matters of this nature as they see fit within the governing
rules, and we see nothing in the rules to prohibit this process as adopted by
MOP.

C. Issue 3 –Did Missouri Presbytery erred when it acted to decline a
   proposal for debate at its December 7, 2019, meeting?

Complainant objects that MOP, at its October 15, 2019, meeting, voted down
his proposal to consider at the December 7, 2019, called meeting the question
of statements at Revoice 18 concerning the adoption of children by gay
couples. He notes that the Complaint Review Committee that considered his
July 8, 2019 Complaint (not the complaint at issue in this case, but the prior
complaint) stated in its report that it agreed with Complainant “that the MOP
owes a clearer statement to the church in relation to its views on non-traditional
adoptions and especially adoptions by actively homosexual ‘married’
couples.” (quoting report of MOP’s Complaint Review Committee). He also
emphasizes the comments of one invited guest at a Revoice 18 workshop who
stated that she was “thrilled” to see gay couples adopting children. However,
as detailed in the Complaint, the CIM apparently spoke with the leader of the
workshop in question, who said that “the comment was made in the context of
talking about whether it was better to leave unadopted children in the state
foster care system until they ‘age out’ of it, or be in favor [of] allowing gay
couples to adopt them.” (quoting CIM report). The CIM report went on to
state that “[W]hile we can understand how someone might take a comment
like that to be a general endorsement of gay couples adopting children, we
consider it unwarranted to construe an off-hand remark, made in the context
of that very particular conversation – and by only a guest of the speaker – as
an endorsement made by the workshop and thus by Revoice.”

We are sympathetic to Complainant’s desire for his Presbytery to consider an
important issue raised by a comment made by a guest at a Revoice 18
workshop. However, that is insufficient reason for us to order a presbytery to
take up a question of this nature. If Complainant had shown that adoption was
a central issue of Revoice 18, or even that multiple speakers had spoken in
                                       842
                                 APPENDIX T



favor of it, we would want to know why MOP did not include that issue in its
9 Theological Judgments. But that is not the case. One comment by one guest
of a speaker at a conference, taken out of context, is not enough to require a
theological determination by a presbytery.

D. Amends

This matter is remanded to MOP Presbytery with instructions that it “hold a
new hearing” (BCO 43-10) which need focus only on the following matters:
“What steps must MOP take to make clear to the broader Church the errors
that were identified in Presbytery’s various investigations with regard to some
of the teachings at Revoice 18, particularly with regard to Theological
Judgments 2, 3, and 5, and what steps must MOP take to fulfill its
responsibilities to protect the peace and purity of the broader Church under
BCO 11-3, 11-4 and 13-9(f) in light of those errors?”

In its new review, we encourage Presbytery to consider interacting with the
May 2020 Report of the General Assembly’s Ad Interim Committee on
Human Sexuality and how specific statements of some speakers at Revoice 18
may have differed from the propositions in that Report. We understand the
AIC Report had only been published for two months when Presbytery declined
to sustain this Complaint, and we recognize the Report does not have
Constitutional status.

The Statement of the three Issues, the Judgments on Issues 2 and 3, and the
Reasoning for Judgments 2 and 3, are largely as they were proposed by the
Panel, as drafted by RE John Pickering, and amended and approved by the
Panel. Judgment 1, the Reasoning for Judgment 1, and the Amends are largely
as they were proposed as a substitute by TE Guy Waters and RE Frederick
Neikirk.

The SJC adopted amendments to several parts and adopted the final decision
on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur         M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur            S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Concur                 Pickering Dissent
      Carrell Concur         Greco Concur                 Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur         Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Dissent         Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur         Lucas Concur                 White Concur
      Dowling Concur         McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (22-2-0)

                                     843
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                         CONCURRING OPINION
                          of RE Howie Donahoe

I write to explain the extent of my concurrence, with reasons, and my
understanding of the Decision. Note, however, a Concurring Opinion is not,
by any means, an authoritative interpretation of any Decision.

1. The Panel’s Proposed Decision - When a case comes to the SJC, a three-
judge panel is randomly drawn to conduct the hearing and draft a proposed
decision. In our present Case, I regarded the reasoning in the Panel’s proposed
decision to be some of the finest writing and clearest argumentation I’ve read
in my 23 years on the court. I hope some of that reasoning will appear in a
dissenting opinion. I agreed with the Panel’s proposed judgments on each of
Presbytery’s six Theological Judgments (“TJs”), and for the reasons provided
by the Panel.

The Panel addressed the allegations of error as specifically stated and
characterized in the Complaint. That was a fair and reasonable approach. The
final SJC Decision, however, dug deeper to address underlying criteria, which
wasn’t necessarily required to adjudicate the Complaint, but it wasn’t
Constitutionally prohibited either. I simply agreed it was reasonable for the
SJC to remand for Presbytery to consider whether the errors already identified
by its several committees (CIM, CRC1, CRC2) “[tended] to the injury of the
peace, purity, or progress of the Church” (the “TIPPPC” criteria, BCO 11-4).
Such errors might not have been identified as such because Presbytery
ultimately applied the narrower “strikes at the vitals of religion” criteria when
adopting the six TJs (the “SVR” criteria, BCO 34-5). This scenario might be
akin to hiring a home inspector to assess all the major systems (plumbing,
HVAC, electrical, foundation), and though he judged all those were working
properly, he didn’t comment on some of the leaks in the roof even though he
noticed them.

2. SJC Standards of Review - I was not initially supportive of the judgment
offered as a substitute for the Panel’s proposed judgment on Issue 1, because
I thought it raised an issue not raised by the parties, which is something
ordinarily restrained by BCO 39-3.1 (below). Subsequently, however, I came
to a different view.

        BCO 39-3 ... To insure that this Constitution is not amended,
        violated or disregarded in judicial process, any review of the


                                      844
                                     APPENDIX T



           judicial proceedings of a lower court by a higher court shall be
           guided by the following principles:
           1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should limit itself
           to the issues raised by the parties to the case in the original
           (lower) court. ... (Emphasis added.)

Some might contend the review limitation of BCO 39-3.1 allows no
exceptions. But the BCO ordinarily recognizes an important distinction
between “should” and “shall.” In the BCO excerpt above, those different
words are used in adjoining sentences and it’s hard to imagine that textual
choice was accidental. The review principles in BCO 39-3, sections 1-4, are
meant to ensure our Constitution is “not amended, violated, or disregarded in
judicial process.” It follows that an overly-strict adherence to only matters
raised by the parties could create the very damage BCO 39-3 is designed to
prevent.

More importantly, and directly related to this present Case, the question about
proper Constitutional criteria is not a new or separate issue, per se, but simply
a reason for the SJC finding a procedural defect in reaching the six TJs.
Addressing an unraised-but-critical procedural matter is different than raising
a new issue. 58

While the following is not a perfect illustration, it might help. Let’s say a
church member is convicted at trial by his Session, and he appeals to
Presbytery. In adjudicating the appeal, the Presbytery declines to “hold a
hearing” and denies the appeal based on the Record sent up by the Session,
which failed to include the trial transcript (contra BCO 42-8 and 34-7). The
SJC might be hesitant to overrule the Session and Presbytery on the merits of
the conviction but sustain the appeal nonetheless and remand for a new hearing
based on Presbytery’s significant Constitutional and procedural mistakes -
regardless of whether the appellant raised the questions in his appeal carried
to the SJC.

Another example that might pertain occurred 18 years ago in Case 2001-32. A
session denied “John Doe’s” complaint, he carried it to the Presbytery, and it
sustained his complaint on the merits. The Session then carried a complaint to
the SJC against Presbytery’s decision. But the SJC declared the matter
judicially out-of-order on the procedural grounds that Doe had filed his

58
      It’s also worth noting the Complainant himself used the SVR criterion in his
     Complaint and in his Brief, and repeatedly asked the SJC to declare that certain
     teachings at R18 “struck at the vitals of religion.”
                                          845
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



complaint with the Session one day after the filing deadline in BCO 43-1.
Nobody had ever raised the BCO 43-1 matter, but the SJC apparently did not
interpret BCO 39-3.1 as prohibiting it from reaching to that Constitutional
breach as its reason to rule it out-of-order. And even though the SJC’s ruling
was procedural, it essentially annulled Presbytery’s judgment and rejected
Doe’s original complaint against the Session, despite the Session adjudicating
it, and Presbytery sustaining it. (The SJC ruling came 24 months after Doe
filed his original complaint with the Session.) 59

More recently, at the SJC’s March 2022 meeting where our present Case was
decided, the SJC ruled a complaint judicially out-of-order because the record
showed the complainant did not have standing, and this was after his
Presbytery had adjudicated his complaint without raising the Constitutional
irregularity. (Case 2021-07 RE Acree v. TN Valley). With reference to BCO
39-3.1, I understand the present Decision to be akin to the examples above.

3. “Revoice 18” - Both the Complaint and Presbytery’s six TJs used phrases
like “the teaching of Revoice 18” or “Revoice 18’s use of ....” This could lead
some to think Presbytery was evaluating an organization rather than
allegations about teachings of individuals at a conference sponsored by that
organization. Some statements in the Complaint and in Presbytery’s TJs seem
to speak as if R18 was a document or an entity, rather than a collection of
different speakers. The SJC Decision is more careful by providing this
footnote on page 7: “In several places in this Reasoning, for the sake of brevity,
we use the phrases, ‘the teachings of Revoice 18’ or ‘the teachings of Revoice.’
By those phrases we mean the teaching of some of the speakers at the Revoice
18 Conference.” (Emphasis added.) It’s reasonable to assume that some things
said by speakers at R18 might not have been officially-adopted statements or
positions of what was then a relatively new organization, and that the
organization’s board may have subsequently adopted official statements or
positions on some of these matters. I understand the Complaint only
references teachings at the July 2018 conference, but the broader church (and
the TIPPPC criteria) might warrant Presbytery also interacting with any
subsequent official statements of the organization. And it would seem any
59
     Session of Christ Covenant v. Central Carolina, M31GA, p. 107. This was decided
     five years after the 25th GA added BCO 39-3 standards of review at the Colorado
     Springs GA in 1997. While the Ad Interim Committee on Judicial Procedures
     (which proposed BCO 39-3 in a multi-recommendation, single package to the Ft.
     Lauderdale GA in 1996) might have intended the new standards of review section
     to preclude what the SJC did in our present Case, the members of the SJC five years
     later did not interpret BCO 39-3.1 that way. (M24GA, p. 97; M25GA, p. 116;
     M31GA, p. 107)
                                           846
                                    APPENDIX T



official statements in place today might be more pertinent to the broader
church than any teachings from July 2018 that might be judged as TIPPPC.

It's also important to realize the SJC judges were not required to review any of
the seminar videos from R18. We have no jurisdictional responsibilities for
that conference, and more importantly, none of them were in the Record of the
Case, nor was the SJC required or asked to take judicial notice of them. SJC
Vow 4 requires us to affirm the following: “I will judge according to the
Constitution of the PCA, through my best efforts applied to nothing other than
the record of the case and other documents properly before me.”

4. Amends - I don’t interpret this Decision to say Presbytery must conduct a
new investigation to apply the TIPPPC criteria (just like the home inspector
doesn’t need to return to the house.) Presbytery can simply review and express
some or all the critiques previously offered by its various committees,
assuming it deems them valid and if they reasonably trigger concern under the
TIPPPC criteria. While the Decision doesn’t also suggest the following, it
might help if Presbytery cited parts of its own 49 “Affirmations and Denials
on Sexuality,” which was in the Record of this Case. For the members of the
Memorial Presbyterian Church and the members of the PCA, what this
Presbytery believes and teaches is probably more clearly and accurately
reflected in Presbytery-adopted statements like the A&Ds rather than in any
critique of some person’s teaching at a conference four years ago.60

The Amends also instruct Presbytery to “[take] steps ... to fulfill its
responsibilities to protect the peace and purity of the broader Church ... in light
of those [TIPPPC] errors” previously identified by MOP Committees. While
the SJC was not obligated to define those “steps,” it could have. And it’s quite
possible different SJC judges might have different things in mind. To be frank,
it’s sometimes easier for judges to reach agreement on language when the
language seems to have some flexibility. Ultimately, however, whether
Presbytery’s response results in greater peace in the broader church is not
solely its responsibility. Maintaining peace is a two-way street (or, better yet,
an eight-lane highway).

This Concurring Opinion was written by RE Howie Donahoe and joined by
TE Ray Cannata.


60
     It’s worth noting the 47th GA’s AIC Report was published four months after TE
     Speck’s January 2020 Complaint was filed with Presbytery, and the Presbytery
     adopted the 49 A&D’s five months after that same January filing.
     https://drive.google.com/file/d/197ZR63Fg_TCwOswHjjz7Il2JaF1O7mjI/view
                                        847
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                               DISSENTING OPINION
                               Of RE John D. Pickering,

I dissent in the Judgment as to Issue 1 and concur in the Judgments as to
Issues 2 and 3.

The Court holds that MOP applied the wrong standard in its search for
erroneous teaching at Revoice 18, pointing to MOP’s emphasis on “[h]eresy
and schism…that strike at the vitals of religion and are industriously spread”
as set forth in BCO 34-5. Court Opinion at 7, lines 12-13. Instead, MOP
should have applied the standards in BCO 11-3,4 and BCO 13-9(f), which
permits courts to resolve questions of doctrine, maintain truth and
righteousness, and condemn erroneous opinions and practices which impinge
on the purity and peace of the church. Because it “unnecessarily restrained
itself by the incorrect criteria for review that it opted to follow,” it “did not
take adequate action with respect to the errors that it had identified.” Court
Opinion at 8, lines 34-36. In other words, MOP was hunting for the trophies
of heresy and schism while passing over the lesser game of erroneous
opinions.61 Significantly, though, the Court does not hold that the erroneous
opinions voiced at Revoice 18 rise to the level of heresy and schism that strike
at the vitals of religion. If the Court held that view, it would have been
unnecessary to comment on the standard of review employed by MOP in order
to justify the Court’s decision. There simply were no trophies to be had on
this hunt.

In any case, I am unconvinced by the Court’s “cumulative impact” approach.
The Court’s view is that “disposing of the allegations by dealing with each one
as a separate entity” misses the fact that the “cumulative impact of those errors
could and did add up to a major concern.” Court Opinion at 11, lines 8-11.
Or, as the saying goes, “the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.” But in
some cases, taken literally, that could mean that 2 + 2 = 5. I believe the Court
has arrived at the wrong answer to the equation, at least with respect to MOP
Theological Judgments 1, 3, and 9.



61
      While I agree with the Court’s analysis of the correct standard of review to be
     applied by presbyteries in cases of this nature, I note that the Complainant neither
     raised this issue in his Complaint nor at oral argument. TE Coffin’s dissent, in which
     I join, explains the significance of this fact.


                                             848
                                  APPENDIX T



Standard of Review for This Court

Regardless of the standard of review MOP should have used, this Court is
obliged to consider the factual issues in this case under the standards of review
set forth in BCO 39-3, which call for “great deference to a lower court
regarding those factual matters which the lower court is more competent to
determine, because of its proximity to the events in question, and because of
its personal knowledge and observations of the parties and witnesses
involved.” This Court is not permitted to reverse a lower court’s factual
findings “unless there is clear error on the part of the lower court.” Thus, with
respect to facts determined by the lower court and reflected in the Record of
the Case, clear error is our standard of review.

On the other hand, we are not required to defer to the lower court “when the
issues being reviewed involve the interpretation of the Constitution of the
Church.” With respect to such issues, we are to interpret and apply the
Constitution according to our “best abilities and understanding, regardless of
the opinion of the lower court.” This standard applies to questions of law, as
opposed to questions of fact.

We face pure questions of fact on some issues and pure questions of law in the
remaining issues. For example, some of CIM’s theological judgments include
factual findings about what was actually taught at Revoice 18, and some
contain determinations of law as to whether what was taught violates our
Constitution. We must defer, absent clear error, to the lower court as to the
factual findings about what was actually taught, which is decisive for some
issues, but we are not required to defer to the lower court as to the
constitutional application of those facts where such application is at issue. If,
for example, MOP determined that a speaker at Revoice 18 taught that the
world is flat, we would have to defer to that finding of fact regarding what was
taught unless the Record of the Case contained clear and direct evidence that
the speaker taught otherwise. But if MOP also determined that flat-earth
teaching is consistent with our Constitution, we would be free to apply our
own abilities and understanding to determining whether that is the case. I
greatly regret that the Court did not examine each specification of error
concerning our appropriate standard of review, as I believe it would have
provided a more credible path to the Court’s result, a result with which I might
have been able to concur as to MOP Theological Judgments 2, 4 and 5.




                                      849
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Analysis of the Complainant’s Six Specifications of Error Concerning
the Theological Judgments of MOP

1. At its December 7, 2019, Called Meeting, did MOP err in approving six
   theological judgments (specifically, judgments #1-5 and #9) of CIM (the
   Committee to Investigate Memorial)?

A. MOP Theological Judgment 1 (“Origins of Homoerotic Desire”)

This specification involves a pure question of fact. Complainant objects to
MOP’s adoption of the judgment that “the evidence does not demonstrate the
allegation that Revoice 18 grounded homoerotic desire and actions in Creation
rather than in the Fall.” The only question at issue is where Revoice 18
grounded homoerotic desire and actions. If MOP were to argue that it is
permissible under our Constitution to ground homoerotic desire in Creation,
we would have a question of law to decide, but that is not the case. Thus,
absent clear error on MOP’s part established in the Record of the Case, this
Court should defer to MOP’s decision on this specification.

Complainant admits in his Complaint that “Revoice 18 speakers and writers
say plainly that homoerotic desires do not arise from creation but from the
Fall” (Complaint at 2) and that such speakers “clearly said (that it believes
homoerotic desire is sinful and grounded only in the Fall).” (Complaint at 3).
His argument is that the Revoice 18 speakers’ other teachings are inconsistent
with this theological position. In terms of our flat-earth analogy, having
admitted that the world is round, the speakers go on to assert the inconsistent
proposition that, if one sails too far, one will fall over the world’s edge.
Complainant raises valid questions about some of the arguments voiced at
Revoice 18, but, in my view, none sufficient to demonstrate clear error on the
part of MOP, especially since most, if not all, of Complainant’s arguments
were reasonably addressed in the CRC Report at pages 7-9.

B. MOP Theological Judgment 2 (“Terminology”)

This specification argues against the judgment that “terms like ‘gay,’ ‘sexual
orientation,’ ‘queer,’ ‘sexual minorities,’ etc., are not always or necessarily
unbiblical; and therefore that Revoice 18’s use of the terminology in question,
though confusing to some and potentially unwise, was not a grave and serious
doctrinal error.” There is no dispute over whether terms such as those listed
were used at Revoice 18; the only issue here is whether the use of such terms
is “always or necessarily unbiblical” when used as they were used at Revoice
                                     850
                                  APPENDIX T



18. That is a question of law under our Constitution; hence, no deference to
the lower court is required.

Complainant does not object in principle to the use of these terms by Christians
in all contexts, or as descriptors of specific sins or temptations to sin. His
argument is more specific. He stated in his Complaint that the use of these
terms at Revoice 18 necessarily carried with it “the underlying assumption of
some sort of intrinsic goodness inherent in the gay orientation. . . . [T]his
language of ‘gay Christian’ necessarily implies a proper and good quality of
‘gayness’ that could endure into Heaven itself.” To the extent that
Complainant’s argument is that speakers at Revoice 18 really meant more than
they said on the surface, it is an argument about facts and an area in which this
Court should defer to the lower court absent clear error in the Record of the
Case. But, as noted above, this issue is best classified as a question of law –
does the use of the terms in question, in the context in which they were used,
violate our Constitution? I would find that it does not, at least in the context
in which the terms were used in this case.

The problem is one of definition of terms. As the CRC Report explains, the
meaning of the term “gay” and other like terms when associated with
“Christian” differs from speaker to speaker. CRC Report at 12; see also
Appendix 2 to CRC Report. That meaning may even be shifting in the English
language. It seems apparent from the Record that different speakers at Revoice
18 may have intended different meanings in the use of these terms.
Complainant disagrees, arguing that that “[t]he Church has a right to
understand ‘gay’ and ‘LGBT’ and ‘sexual minority,’ etc., as referring to a
group of people who identify as such and live out this lifestyle” (emphasis
added). But Complainant cites no authority for the Church’s alleged right to
define these terms for the people using them.

This specification of error is really a conflation of issues raised in other
specifications of error. For example, the only specific instance cited in
Complainant’s brief of a speaker at Revoice 18 advancing a view that clearly
carries with it a problematic meaning for “gay” is the same instance used to
support Specification of Error 1.C. (The Gay Beneath the Gay). See
Complaint’s Brief at 3; see also subsection C. below. I believe that issue is
more properly dealt with in 1.C., which addresses it directly. His other
examples are from written works by Revoice 18 speakers, but they are not
from statements made at the conference. Those examples may inform
worrisome statements by those authors made at the conference, but
Complainant does not cite any such statements. But, setting all this aside and
                                      851
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



assuming for purposes of argument that some speakers at Revoice 18 used
terms like “gay” in a manner that violated our Constitution, it is not clear why
that is a problem. Surely the peace and purity of the church can withstand civil
discussion of a timely theological issue at a conference convened in part for
that purpose?

And yet, caution is certainly in order. The CRC Report expressed reservations
about the insufficiency of the wording of the judgment in its lack of caution
concerning the careful use of “gay” and like terms, and MOP followed the
CRC Report’s recommendation in adopting four general principles along with
the judgment to be utilized within the Presbytery when discussing these issues.
As expressed in the Report:

        1. Go overboard in defining your terms AND your beliefs
           about homosexual desires.
        2. Seek to employ the least controversial terms in the widest
           public settings.
        3. In general settings, such as a worship service, it may be
           best to refrain from using terminology that requires
           multiple layers of complex distinctions.
        4. Employ the full orbed principles of the weaker brother.

Minutes of the Stated Meeting of MOP (July 21, 2020), at 7. I commend these
principles along with this statement quoted in the CRC Report from the PCA’s
Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality:

        Nevertheless, we recognize that some Christians may use the
        term “gay” in an effort to be more readily understood by non-
        Christians. The word “gay” is common in our culture, and we
        do not think it wise for churches to police every use of the term.
        Our burden is that we do not justify our sin struggles by
        affixing them to our identity as Christians. Churches should
        be gentle, patient, and intentional with believers who call
        themselves “gay Christians,” encouraging them, as part of the
        process of sanctification, to leave behind identification
        language rooted in sinful desires, to live chaste lives, to refrain
        from entering into temptation, and to mortify their sinful
        desires.
        (Report of the PCA’s Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality,
        page 10, lines 12-19, as quoted in CRC Report at 12.)


                                      852
                                        APPENDIX T



Finally, implicit in this specification of error is the concept that Memorial
endorsed all the views taught or offered at Revoice 18, an argument made
explicit in Specification of Error 1.F. concerning the statements of a Roman
Catholic speaker at the conference. If Revoice 18 speakers had used terms like
“gay” in a manner that would violate our Constitution, Memorial’s primary
error would appear to be failing to warn its congregation that not all speakers
at the conference should be presumed to be reliable teachers of sound doctrine,
not necessarily in permitting the speakers to participate in the conference.

Although it is admittedly a close question, for the reasons explained above, I
would hold that Complainant has failed to demonstrate that the use of the terms
in question at Revoice 18 violates our Constitution.

C. MOP Theological Judgment 3 (“The Gay Beneath the Gay”)

This specification takes issue with MOP’s judgment that “the evidence was
such that this question as to whether a ‘gay beneath the gay’ exists could not
have been judged to be a key teaching of Revoice, but continues to have the
potential for becoming a grave and serious error if it begins to play a more
central role, and thus we exhort those involved with Revoice to consider our
position on this matter.” Like the first specification, this one involves a pure
question of fact – is there sufficient evidence in the Record of the Case to
support MOP’s judgment that the existence of a “gay beneath the gay” was not
a key teaching of Revoice 18? I would find that such evidence exists. As
explained in the CRC Report, only one Revoice 18 speaker could be found to
broach this subject directly, and even she may not be an advocate of the view.
CRC Report at 16-17. Complainant believes this view underlies much of what
was taught at Revoice 18, but MOP concluded otherwise, and Complainant
has failed to show that MOP committed clear error in doing so. Thus, I would
defer to MOP’s conclusions on this issue.62
D. MOP Theological Judgment 4 (“Gay Identity”)

62
     This specification of error is in some sense the opposite side of the coin that is
     specification of error 1.A. If same-sex attraction were grounded in Creation and not
     the Fall (a view inconsistent with our Constitution), then presumably the positive
     attributes associated with it could be celebrated as the “gayness beneath the gay.”
     In that sense, specifications 1.A. and 1.D. are the same. Said differently, a theory
     of the “gay beneath the gay” would likely violate our standards because same-sex
     attraction is grounded in the Fall, not in Creation. But Missouri found that a positive
     creational view of “gay beneath the gay” was not taught at Revoice 18, and I do not
     see sufficient factual evidence in the Record of the Case to reverse that factual
     finding.
                                             853
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



This specification argues against MOP’s judgment that it is not a grave and
serious error “to claim something which can be traced to our sin nature as in
any sense a part of our ‘identity,’ of [sic] part of ‘who we are,’ as Revoice does
with being [same-sex attracted].” The judgment also included the following
statement of application: “[T]he core question is not: ‘Is that which rises from
sin part of who you are?’ but rather: ‘What are you doing with all the broken
parts and places of who you are?’” Like the second specification, this one
raises a constitutional question, not a factual question. There is no real dispute
over whether some Revoice 18 speakers and teachers used terms like “gay” as
an identity marker.

Not surprisingly, nothing in our Constitution prohibits a Christian, in any
circumstance, from making known that he or she is persistently tempted by a
particular sin. Complainant’s argument, of course, goes deeper, and says that
use of terms like “gay” in connection with one’s identity “describ[es] or
modif[ies] his Christian identity.” Complaint at 7. The core of the argument
is that the label being used describes not only the particular Christian, but
Christianity’s moral doctrine concerning same-sex attraction. “I am gay, and
I am a Christian,” or its equivalent, according to the argument, always and
necessarily becomes an affirmation of same-sex attraction (as opposed to
same-sex sexual activity) as a morally neutral characteristic of some people.
Complainant’s comparisons to a physical handicap like blindness illustrate this
point; Complainant (reasonably) objects to comparing same-sex attraction to
a morally neutral condition like blindness because same-sex attraction is not
morally neutral. I agree with Complainant on this point; same-sex attraction
and blindness are not morally equivalent. However, although it is a close
question on which there is room for disagreement, I do not agree that the
Record of the Case supports the conclusion that the use of terms like “gay” as
an identifier at Revoice 18 necessarily implies that the conference speakers
and teachers hold or endorse a morally neutral view of same-sex attraction.63

As with Specification of Error I.B. (Terminology), it appears that, if and to the
extent that any speakers at Revoice 18 did teach a morally neutral view of
same-sex attraction, Memorial’s error was one of failing to caution its
congregation about the likelihood of heterodox views being taught at the
63
     It is possible that I would reach a different conclusion on this issue if I listened to
     all the presentations made at Revoice 18, which I have not done. As RE Donahoe’s
     concurring opinion points out, under our rules, the Court’s decisions are to be made
     solely on the bases of what is contained in the Record of the Case, and neither
     recordings nor transcripts of the Revoice 18 presentations were contained within the
     record, although excerpts were quoted.
                                             854
                                   APPENDIX T



conference, not necessarily the sponsorship of the conference. But, as with
I.B., I would not reach that issue, because I do not agree that it violates our
Constitution “to claim something which can be traced to our sin nature as in
any sense a part of our ‘identity,’ of [sic] part of ‘who we are,’” at least not as
those concepts were expressed at Revoice 18 as reflected in the Record of the
Case.

E. MOP Theological Judgment 5 (“Spiritual Friendship”)

This specification contends that MOP erred in concluding that Revoice 18 did
not teach “that ‘quasi-romantic’ kinds of relationships are legitimate before
God as long as explicitly sexual lines are not crossed” and in concluding that
Revoice 18’s “entertaining publicly the possibility of celibate partnerships
(and thereby implicitly commending them, even if unintentionally)” was an
error of judgment rather than an error of doctrine. A key statement in this
judgment was that “Memorial PC, through its pastor, TE Johnson, adequately
warned in his Revoice 18 talk – and does generally, in his pastoral counsel –
about the danger of friendships morphing into romances, stressing the
importance of boundaries.” Complainant stresses the same dangers as
Memorial and TE Johnson – the obvious peril of allowing a close personal
relationship, particularly a one-on-one relationship, between two persons who
are or may be sexually attracted to one another to become a sexual relationship.
He points to Revoice 18 speakers who dwelt on the relationships recorded in
the Bible between Ruth and Naomi, David and Jonathan, and Jesus and John
as the basis for pledges of friendship between people attracted to the same sex.
Complainant’s Brief at 6-7. In Complainant’s words, “This dangerous
teaching encouraged lonely men and women to take fire into their bosoms –
will they not be burned (Proverbs 6:27)?” Complaint at 8.

The wording of this judgment points toward a reading of it as a factual
judgment, not a determination of law, as it focuses on what “Revoice leaders
or speakers at Revoice 18 have taught.” However, I see no real dispute over
what was said at Revoice 18 on this topic. The real dispute is over whether
what was said, which all parties appear to agree was unwise at times and ran
the risk of leading people astray, rises to the level of a constitutional violation.
Complainant believes that it does, but MOP judged that the statements were
errors of judgment, not doctrine. Although it is a close question, I would agree
with MOP, primarily because our Constitution plainly does not prohibit close
personal relationships between members of the same sex, and it does not
contain a carve-out along the lines of “except for gay people.” The wisdom of
focusing on the Biblical examples of these relationships at a conference like
                                        855
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Revoice 18, particularly without qualifying cautions, is a very different issue,
as Memorial, TE Johnson, MOP, and Complainant all appear to appreciate.
But that is not the issue before us. Just because something is a bad idea (or is
executed in an unwise manner) does not make it a violation of our Constitution.

F. MOP Theological Judgment 9 (“Roman Catholic Speakers”).

This specification rejects MOP’s judgment that “although Memorial erred in
failing to make clear to their congregation our doctrinal differences with
Roman Catholicism before and after the Revoice 18 conference, it did not err
in allowing Roman Catholics to speak in their church building under the aegis
of Revoice, an outside organization . . . .” This issue presents a pure
constitutional question – may a PCA church allow a Roman Catholic to speak
in its church building in a context like the Revoice 18 conference?
Complainant provides a description of that context:

        When a church hosts a conference, advertises that conference
        amongst its membership, calls one of the conference speakers
        to fill its pulpit on the following Lord’s Day, and agrees to have
        its own senior pastor speaks [sic] at that conference, the host
        church is commending that conference to its members. This
        necessarily implies that the speakers at this conference are
        generally trustworthy and orthodox speakers.

Complaint at 10. I agree with Complainant’s first sentence. It is not credible
to argue that Memorial did not commend Revoice 18 to its members. I do not
necessarily reject the second sentence, unless the church explains to its
members in some reasonable fashion that one or particular speakers, or
possibly all of them except for the church’s senior pastor and other named
speakers, should not be uncritically considered as generally trustworthy and
orthodox. For example, a church might host a conference on serving the needs
of the poor and invite speakers with varying backgrounds and perspectives,
including unbelievers and Marxists. But a reasonable caution of some kind to
the church’s membership would be in order. That is precisely what MOP said
in its judgment – “Memorial erred in failing to make clear to their congregants
our doctrinal differences with Roman Catholicism before and after the Revoice
18 conference.” I take no position on exactly how such cautions should be
communicated, as that will differ according to time and place. But I agree with
MOP that Memorial erred in this way.
Complainant does not appear to be arguing (and the Court’s opinion should
not be interpreted to hold) that no Roman Catholic may speak in a PCA church
                                      856
                                   APPENDIX T



building under any circumstances. His objection is limited to the context of
this particular conference. He emphasizes the particular relevance of the
Roman Catholic doctrine of concupiscence, the teaching that the appetite for
sin, although the effect of sin, is not itself sinful unless consented to and acted
upon. At least one Roman Catholic Revoice 18 speaker apparently
characterized this view as a “traditional Christian ethic.” Obviously, in light
of the other issues already discussed in this opinion, the Roman Catholic
doctrine of concupiscence (which is contradicted by our Constitution (see, e.g.,
WCF 35; WSC 18; James 1:14-15)) could be used to support a morally neutral
view of same-sex attraction. I believe this danger illustrates the need MOP
identified for the importance of a session making its congregation aware that
non-PCA views will likely be presented at a conference being hosted by the
church. I do not believe that it compels us to conclude that Memorial violated
our Constitution by hosting Revoice 18 or that MOP did so through this
judgment.

I am particularly troubled by the Court’s cumulative approach as it attaches to
this issue. Were the Court’s opinion to be read too broadly, it could easily be
misunderstood to prohibit any Roman Catholic from ever addressing a group
of people in a PCA church building on any matter of faith. I do not believe
that is at all what the Court intends, but I also believe that, had the Court
considered each specification of error individually, it would have answered
this one in the negative.

A Note on the Court’s Amends

Although I dissent from the Court’s decision, I am not troubled by the Amends
required by the Court, which fall well short of Complainant’s requested
prosecution of TE Greg Johnson and Memorial. Complaint at 14. The
Amends focus on MOP’s responsibility to “make clear to the broader Church
the errors that were identified in Presbytery’s various investigations with
regard to some of the teachings at Revoice 18.” All parties appear to agree
that there were errors taught at Revoice 18, and additional clarity regarding
those errors should benefit us all. I am hopeful that MOP’s efforts in response
to the Court’s decision will contribute to the peace and purity of the Church.

This dissenting opinion was written by RE John D. Pickering and joined by
joined by TE David F. Coffin, Jr.




                                       857
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                           DISSENTING OPINION
                           of TE David F. Coffin, Jr.

I dissent from the decision of the Standing Judicial Commission (SJC) to
sustain the above cited Complaint in Issue 1.

The SJC sustained the Complaint in Issue 1, in part, because of the
Commission’s objection to the significant error made by CIM at the outset of
their investigation, an error acquiesced in by Presbytery in their reception of
CIM’s report.

CIM was assigned to undertake a BCO 31-2 investigation of TE Greg Johnson
and a BCO 40-5 investigation of the Session of Memorial. The standard
governing such investigations are clearly set forth in each: BCO 31-2, whether
the investigation discovers “a strong presumption of guilt” with respect to
“reports affecting their Christian character”; BCO 40-5, whether the
investigation discovers “any important delinquency or grossly unconstitutional
proceedings”. However CIM believed that the BCO implicitly allowed the
Committee to set aside the standards above and put in place a standard of their
own invention. That is to say, CIM took a standard treating the censure of
deposition at the conclusion of a guilty verdict at trial in BCO 34-5, i.e., “errors
[that] . . . strike at the vitals of religion and are industriously spread,” and made
that the standard for their pre-trial investigation of both TE Johnson and the
Memorial Session. This was a profound error, and would have led to harmful
consequences, had it not been for Missouri’s subsequent deliberations in the
matter, which largely abandoned the CIM invention in favor of the appropriate
BCO standards as set forth above.

That being granted, the SJC had no right to sustain the Complaint on an issue
never raised by the Complainant. BCO 39-3.1. plainly states: “A higher court,
reviewing a lower court, should limit itself to the issues raised by the parties
to the case in the original (lower) court.” No party raised the issue of CMI’s
error, certainly not the Complainant. TE Speck was a member of CMI and
participated in its formulation of the erroneous standard. He never raised or
recorded an objection, in any of the many hearings before Presbytery or its
committees, but rather used the standard in his submissions, arguing that the
evidence for the Complaint showed the invented standard had been met. One
can see this, for example, in the text of the Complaint filed with Presbytery:

        MOP's consideration of the ClM Report's Judgments
        concluded with MOP re-affirming its positions on such areas
                                        858
                                  APPENDIX T



        as homosexuality, homosexual identity, and same-sex
        attraction, namely: “We do not believe that doctrinal positions
        contrary to the Scriptures and our confessional standards were
        advanced at Revoice 18. . . .” Complainant contends that MOP
        erred grievously in vindicating the teachings of Revoice 18,
        errors that strike at the vitals of religion and will cause
        significant harm to the peace and purity of the Church.
        [Emphasis added.]

The Record of the Case shows that every party to this case employed the faulty
standard multiple times without any hint of doubt as to its legitimacy.

Faced with this reasoning, in the SJC’s debate concerning its decision, an
argument was raised to counter it that was apparently persuasive. It was urged
that “should,” in the BCO, refers to a procedure that is highly recommended
and will ordinarily be followed, the exception being only in unusual
circumstances. On the other hand, it was alleged, “shall” in the BCO refers to
a required procedure that must be followed in every circumstance. In light of
this alleged interpretive rule, in debate on the substitute in this case, the SJC
was plausibly urged that BCO 39-3.1 says “should” rather than “shall,” and
therefore compliance was only a matter of wisdom, in most cases, but can be
set aside at will.

It might be nice if there were such a clear, handy, rule. Unfortunately, that rule
is in no place adopted and published in our governing documents, and in many
and important instances, the BCO does not “recognize” such a rule and uses
the word “should” in a well-established grammatical sense, a sense that can
only be discovered contextually, not by rule. Woodenly following the above-
mentioned rule would lead to disastrous misinterpretations of the Constitution
of the PCA.

One must remember that in the English language “should” is a modal verb that
is used for a variety of purposes: 1. giving advice, suggestion, or
recommendation; 2. predicting the future and talking about expectations; 3.
expressing an order, obligation, or instruction (e.g., “All visitors should pay
the fee beforehand.”); and 4. advising not to do something. The BCO of the
PCA regularly uses the word “should” in the third sense. A few important
instances will suffice to make the point. A helpful test is to consider, in its
context, whether “should” could be modified by “most often” and still preserve
the sense of the rule. Emphasis is added throughout.


                                       859
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           2-3. “It is according to scriptural example that the Church
           should be divided into many individual churches.”

           4-5. “Churches without teaching elders ought not to forsake the
           assembling of themselves together, but should be convened by
           the Session on the Lord's Day. . . .”

           5-2.c. “Should it become necessary, the Presbytery may
           dissolve the mission church. Church members enrolled should
           be cared for according to the procedures of 13-10.”

           5-9. “A new church can be organized only by the authority of
           Presbytery.”
                   a. A Presbytery should establish standing rules setting
           forth the prerequisites that qualify a mission church to begin
           the organization process. . . .”

           8-2. “He that fills this office should possess a competency of
           human learning and be blameless in life, sound in the faith and
           apt to teach. He should exhibit a sobriety and holiness of life
           becoming the Gospel. He should rule his own house well and
           should have a good report of them that are outside the
           Church.”64

           11-4. “For the orderly and efficient dispatch of ecclesiastical
           business, it is necessary that the sphere of action of each court
           should be distinctly defined. . . .”

           12-1. “if there is only one ruling elder, he does not constitute a
           Session, but he should take spiritual oversight of the church,
           should represent it at Presbytery, should grant letters of

64
     N.B.: The BCO, in paraphrasing 1 Tim. 3:2–4, is using “should” for “must”: “2
     Therefore an overseer must be above reproach, [must be] the husband of one
     wife, [must be] sober-minded, [must be] self-controlled, [must be] respectable, [must
     be] hospitable, [must be] able to teach, 3 not a drunkard, not violent but gentle, not
     quarrelsome, not a lover of money. 4 He must manage his own household well, with
     all dignity keeping his children submissive. . . . 7 Moreover, he must be well thought
     of by outsiders. . . .” [ESV; emphasis added]. Would our BCO be worded to relax
     the standard of Scripture? Of course not! It is using the word “should” in the
     perfectly acceptable grammatical sense of expressing an order, obligation, or
     instruction.
                                             860
                         APPENDIX T



dismission, and should report to the Presbytery any matter
needing the action of a Church court. . . .”

14-1.11. “Each alternate should attend each meeting and fill
any vacancy necessary to meet a quorum.”

16-3. “. . . And it is indispensable that, besides possessing the
necessary gifts and abilities, natural and acquired, every one
admitted to an office should be sound in the faith, and his life
be according to godliness.”

19-7. “. . . The nature of the internship shall be determined by
the Presbytery, but it should involve the candidate in full scope
of the duties of any regular ministerial calling approved by the
Presbytery. . . .”

20-2. “Every church should be under the pastoral oversight of
a minister, and when a church has no pastor it should seek to
secure one without delay. . . .”

21-4.b. “In all cases, he should be asked to indicate whether he
has changed his previous views concerning any points in the
Confession of Faith, Catechisms, and Book of Church Order
of the Presbyterian Church in America. . . .”

24-1. “Every church shall elect persons to the offices of ruling
elder and deacon in the following manner: At such times as
determined by the Session, communicant members of the
congregation may submit names to the Session, keeping in
mind that each prospective officer should be an active male
member who meets the qualifications set forth in 1 Timothy 3
and Titus 1.”

34-3. “If any one knows a minister to be guilty of a private
offense, he should warn him in private. But if the offense be
persisted in, or become public, he should bring the case to the
attention of some other minister of the Presbytery.”

35-6. “. . . If, however, at any time a witness should present
himself before a court, who for conscientious reasons prefers


                              861
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       to swear or affirm in any other manner, he should be allowed
       to do so.”

All this notwithstanding, the crucial instances for this Dissent are found
throughout BCO 39-3.

       39-3. “. . . To insure that this Constitution is not amended,
       violated or disregarded in judicial process, any review of the
       judicial proceedings of a lower court by a higher court shall be
       guided by the following principles:
           1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should limit
                itself to the issues raised by the parties to the case in
                the original (lower) court. Further, the higher court
                should resolve such issues by applying the
                Constitution of the church, as previously established
                through the constitutional process.
           2. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
                deference to a lower court regarding those factual
                matters which the lower court is more competent to
                determine, because of its proximity to the events in
                question, and because of its personal knowledge and
                observations of the parties and witnesses involved.
                Therefore, a higher court should not reverse a factual
                finding of a lower court, unless there is clear error on
                the part of the lower court.
           3. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
                deference to a lower court regarding those matters of
                discretion and judgment which can only be addressed
                by a court with familiar acquaintance of the events and
                parties. Such matters of discretion and judgment
                would include, but not be limited to: the moral
                character of candidates for sacred office, the
                appropriate censure to impose after a disciplinary trial,
                or judgment about the comparative credibility of
                conflicting witnesses. Therefore, a higher court should
                not reverse such a judgment by a lower court, unless
                there is clear error on the part of the lower court.
           4. The higher court does have the power and obligation
                of judicial review, which cannot be satisfied by always
                deferring to the findings of a lower court. Therefore, a
                higher court should not consider itself obliged to
                                     862
                                        APPENDIX T



                     exhibit the same deference to a lower court when the
                     issues being reviewed involve the interpretation of the
                     Constitution of the Church. Regarding such issues, the
                     higher court has the duty and authority to interpret and
                     apply the Constitution of the Church according to its
                     best abilities and understanding, regardless of the
                     opinion of the lower court.

To relieve the reader from a proliferation of needless argumentation, I will
simply assert, without fear of contradiction, that this Court has, with perfect
consistency, interpreted “should” in this provision, to have the sense of “must.”
With respect to principles 2 and 3 the Court has repeatedly noted that under
these standards the higher court is required to defer unless there is a showing
of clear error.

However, a close reading of principle 1 is demonstrative: “A higher court,
reviewing a lower court, should [most often?] limit itself to the issues raised
by the parties to the case in the original (lower) court. Further, the higher court
should [most often?] resolve such issues by applying the Constitution of the
church, as previously established through the constitutional process.” Clearly
such a construction in the second part of the principle would lead to a profound
failure to grasp our Constitutional order. Just as clearly, the sense of the word
does not shift in the two sentences. In each case, contextually, “should” can
only be properly construed as “must.”65

Thus it is that, for what were doubtless the best of intentions, the SJC violated
the BCO in its decision to sustain the above cited Complaint in Issue 1. It is
hard to overstate the importance of BCO 39-3.1. in its requirement that the SJC
“limit itself to the issues raised by the parties to the case in the original (lower)
court.” Before this provision was adopted, it was possible for judges to raise
matters unrelated to the issues brought before the court, and thus use the case
to advance, not the litigant’s, but their own favored causes. This possibility
was a serious threat to the integrity of the SJC as an appellate court. In my

65
     Of course nothing asserted in this interpretation relieves an appellate court from the
     responsibility to enforce the obligations of the Rules of Disciple with respect to
     appellate proceedings and dismissing a case for failure to comply. These are formal
     issues that belong to the prerogatives of the appellate court, that in the nature of the
     case could not be raised by the parties, as compared to the material issues as raised
     by the parties, that limit the appellate court’s consideration. For the SJC these formal
     issues are addressed in the Court’s responsibility to consider whether a case is
     Administratively or Judicially in order.
                                              863
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



judgment all members of the court must be vigilant to protect and uphold this
principle.

Further, I note that the Complaint, in each of the specifications of Issue 1, is
alleging specific doctrinal errors. The Panel’s recommended decision asserted
that each of those doctrinal errors were not proven from the ROC (with
evidence from the Panel proposed in each instance), and thus denied the
complaint. A substitute for the Panel’s recommendation in Issue 1 sustained
the complaint, ostensibly with respect to the doctrinal errors alleged, but it
does not even address the enumerated errors. Upon the adoption of the
substitute sustaining the Complaint, the SJC, without providing evidence, by
implication declared that the doctrinal errors alleged are proven. In fact, the
SJC’s reasoning addresses only a number of instances where the presbytery
grants that there were problems with Revoice teaching. But this evidence,
however certainly available in the Record of the Case, simply does not sustain
the Complaint as set forth in Issue 1. It does sustain another complaint that
might have been, but was not, in fact, before the court.66

This dissenting opinion was written by TE David F. Coffin, Jr. and joined by
RE John D. Pickering.


                     CASE NO. 2021-03
           COMPLAINT OF RE DONAVON. J. DEJONG
                            v.
     SESSION OF VILLAGE SEVEN PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
                 DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                       March 3, 2022

I. CASE SUMMARY

This case came before the SJC on the Complaint of RE Donavon J. (DJ)
DeJong against the Session of his church, Village Seven Presbyterian Church
(V7PC) in Colorado Springs, Colorado, within the Rocky Mountain
Presbytery (RMP). At issue are changes made to the governing structure and
procedures of V7PC.


66
  For a full discussion and persuasive defense of this point, see RE Pickering’s dissent,
in which I join.


                                          864
