                            MINUTES
                                of the

    FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
                                of the

   PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA

                       VOLUME 2 of 2




PLEASE NOTE:
1. The pages of Volume 1 and Volume 2 are numbered consecutively.
2. The INDEX to both volumes is found at the back of Volume 2.




                          VOLUME 1, pp. 1-684
      PART I: Directory of General Assembly Committees and Agencies
                           PART II: Daily Journal
                         PART III: Appendices A-S

                      VOLUME 2, pp. 685-1414
                      PART III: Appendices T-X
                PART IV: Corrections to Previous Minutes
                     Part V: References and Index
This page intentionally left blank
                                PART III

                          APPENDICES
                   (Continued: Appendices T-X)
NOTE: Appendices A-S are included in Volume 1 of these Minutes.
      Appendices T-X are found in Volume 2.
      See a Table of Contents for these Appendices on the back of this page.


These Appendices include the Reports of the General Assembly Committees,
Agencies, and Standing Judicial Commission as originally submitted to the
General Assembly. The recommendations in this section are those originally
submitted and may have been amended or not adopted by the Assembly. See
Part II, Journal, to find the recommendations as they were adopted by the
Assembly.

Appendix W presents the Overtures as originally submitted by the presbyteries.
See the Overtures Committee report and other Committee of Commissioner
reports for Assembly action on these overtures, including any amendments.

The PCA Committee and Agency budgets, as approved by the Assembly, are
found in Appendix C, Attachment 3, beginning on p. 215, Vol. 1.
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                       APPENDICES
                                        CONTENTS

PERMANENT COMMITTEE AND AGENCY REPORTS
APPENDIX A  Stated Clerk ................................................................ 139
APPENDIX B  Board of Directors ...................................................... 185
APPENDIX C  Administrative Committee.......................................... 191
APPENDIX D  Committee on Discipleship Ministries .......................... 283
APPENDIX E  Covenant College........................................................ 293
APPENDIX F  Covenant Theological Seminary................................. 299
APPENDIX G  Mission to North America .......................................... 320
APPENDIX H  Mission to the World .................................................. 343
APPENDIX I  PCA Foundation ......................................................... 365
APPENDIX J  PCA Retirement & Benefits, Inc. ............................... 375
APPENDIX K  Reformed University Fellowship ................................ 384
APPENDIX L  Ridge Haven ............................................................... 408

SPECIAL COMMITTEE REPORTS
APPENDIX M   Cooperative Ministries Committee ............................. 411
APPENDIX N   Interchurch Relations Committee ............................... 412
APPENDIX O   Committee on Constitutional Business ....................... 419
APPENDIX P   Nominating Committee .............................................. 437
                 Supplemental Report ............................................ 469
APPENDIX Q   Theological Examining Committee..................................... 479
APPENDIX R   Committee on Review of Presbytery Records .............. 482

OTHER REPORTS
APPENDIX S   Attendance Report ................................................................ 639
APPENDIX T   Standing Judicial Commission ............................................. 685
                 Supplemental Report...................................................... 875
APPENDIX U   Committee on Thanks ........................................................... 947
APPENDIX V   Ad Interim on Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault.......... 949

OVERTURES
APPENDIX W                Overtures to 49th General Assembly................................. 1267

COMMUNICATIONS – None .......................................................................... N/A

WORSHIP SERVICE
APPENDIX X    Tuesday Evening Worship.................................................. 1385
                            APPENDIX T

              REPORT OF THE
       STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION
   TO THE FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
  OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA
                         I. INTRODUCTION

Since its report to the 48th General Assembly, the Standing Judicial
Commission has held four meetings: a video conference called meeting on July
13, 2021; an in-person Stated Meeting on October 21, 2021; a video
conference called meeting on February 1, 2022; and an in-person Stated
Meeting on March 3, 2022.

Members of the Standing Judicial Commission:

Class of 2022
TE Ray Cannata, S. Louisiana       RE John Bise, Providence
TE Fred Greco, Houston Metro       RE EJ Nusbaum, Rocky Mtn
TE Guy Waters, MS Valley           RE John Pickering, Evangel

Class of 2023
Vacant*                            RE Daniel Carrell, James River
TE Carl Ellis, Jr., TN Valley      RE Bruce Terrell, Metro N.Y.
TE Charles McGowan, Nashville      RE John B. White, Jr., M. Atlanta

Class of 2024
TE Hoochan Paul Lee, Korean NE RE Howie Donahoe, Pacific NW
TE Sean Lucas, Covenant        RE Melton Duncan, Calvary
TE Mike Ross, Columbus Metr0   RE Samuel Duncan, Grace

Class of 2025
TE Paul Bankson, C. Georgia        RE Steve Dowling, SE Alabama
TE David Coffin, Jr., Potomac      RE Frederick Neikirk, Ascension
TE Paul Kooistra, Warrior          RE R. Jackson Wilson, GA Foothills

*TE Bryan Chapell resigned as a member of the Commission after completing
service on the cases initiated prior to his election as Stated Clerk.

                                    685
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                         II. JUDICIAL CASES

At this time, Cases 2021-06, 2021-09, 2021-10, 2021-11, 2021-13, 2021-14,
2021-15, 2022-01, 2022-02, and 2022-04 are being considered by panels. The
SJC has completed its work on the cases listed below, and the report on those
cases follows in the order in which they were decided.

2020-07     Wilbourne v. Pacific Presbytery
2020-08     Gendall et al v. Pacific Presbytery
2020-09     Oxbalt et al v. Pacific Presbytery
2020-06     Gordon v. Southern New England Presbytery
2020-14     Myers v. Illiana Presbytery
2021-01     Michelson v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery
2021-02     Tippins v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery
2020-10     Eagle v. Savannah River Presbytery
2021-05     Eudaly, et al. v. Southwest Florida Presbytery
2021-08     In the matter of Korean Southwest Orange County
2020-12     Speck v. Missouri Presbytery
2021-12     Michelson v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery
2020-02     In the matter of PCA v. Missouri Presbytery
2020-05     Speck v. Missouri Presbytery
2021-03     DeJong v. Session of Village Seven Presbyterian Church
2021-07     Acree v. Tennessee Valley Presbytery
2021-08     Citation of Korean Southwest Orange Presbytery




                                    686
                                 APPENDIX T



                    III. REPORT OF THE CASES

                           CASE NO. 2020-07
                       TE RANKIN WILBOURNE
                                 V.
                        PACIFIC PRESBYTERY

                    CASE NO. 2020-08
        TE SHAWN GENDALL, TE RUSSELL HIGHTOWER
                  AND TE TIMOTHY LIEN
                           V.
                  PACIFIC PRESBYTERY

                        CASE NO. 2020-09
               RE SEAN OZBALT AND RE ERIN BARR
                              V.
                     PACIFIC PRESBYTERY

                     DECISION ON COMPLAINTS
                            July13, 2021

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

A letter with accusations against TE Rankin Wilbourne was sent to Pacific
Presbytery’s Shepherding Committee. Most, if not all, of the 36 signers were
reported to be past staff or past members of Pacific Crossroads Church. The
following day, Presbytery formed an investigative commission (called the
Judicial Commission) “to investigate the allegations submitted to the
Shepherding Committee, and to determine whether a strong presumption of
guilt can be corroborated, per BCO 31-2, and to bring charges if necessary.”
Soon thereafter, the Commission informed TE Wilbourne that accusations
were made concerning his “dealings with the officers, staff and employees of
PCC,” but neither the specific allegations nor the names of the accusers were
provided to the minister. The accused was not invited to meet with the
investigative Commission until its 28th meeting. After three months of
investigating, and 34 meetings, the Commission was intending to “bring
charges,” when the accused minister requested the matter be handled as a BCO
38-1 case without process. Two weeks later, the Commission and the minister
reached an agreement on a “full statement of the facts” and it was to be
presented at a called Presbytery meeting. At the meeting, the Commission
distributed and read aloud a six-page report prior to the minister reading his
                                     687
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Statement of Facts and Confession of Guilt. The minister was dismissed for
the next part of the meeting, lengthy discussion ensued, Presbytery adopted a
motion that BCO 34-7 applied, and the minister was deposed from the
ministry. All three Complaints alleged several errors, especially that the
reading of the negative Commission report, which was not part of the agreed-
upon Statement, violated BCO 38-1. The SJC eventually sustained the
Complaints, annulled the censure of deposition, recommended Presbytery treat
his censure (in effect for seventeen (17) months as of the date of this decision)
as definite suspension from office (BCO 36-4) and as being a sufficient censure
for the offenses confessed in the minister’s Statement, and recommended
Presbytery consider the matter closed.

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

10/02/19     The day before Presbytery’s Fall Stated Meeting, Pacific’s
             Shepherding Committee received a communication with allegations
             against TE Rankin Wilbourne. The Committee indicated it was
             signed by 36 people, but the letter is not in the Record.

10/03/19     Presbytery’s Fall Stated Meeting. The Shepherding Committee
             recommended that Presbytery “establish a judicial commission to
             investigate the allegations submitted to the Shepherding
             Committee, and to determine whether a strong presumption of
             guilt can be corroborated, per BCO 31-2, and to bring charges if
             necessary.” A motion1 to amend failed, which sought to make it
             a committee. The Shepherding Committee recommendation was
             adopted. Presbytery then adopted a motion to appoint the
             following to the Judicial Commission (“JC”): TEs Ron Svendsen,
             TE Jason Park, TE Jeff Tell, RE Bob Nisbet, RE Rod DenOuden,
             and RE Randy Berg.


1
  It is not clear from the record as to whether this commission was to be a BCO 15-1
commission that would conclude the business referred to it, keeping a record of its
proceedings to be submitted to the appointing court, or a BCO 15-3 judicial
commission, which would require the appointing court to, without debate, to approve
or disapprove its judgment. Although not fatal, the appointment of a committee, rather
than a commission of any sort, at this point would have been a wiser and more prudent
procedural vehicle to conduct the BCO 31-2 investigation. Ordinarily, a BCO 15-3
judicial commission should not be appointed until after a strong presumption of guilt
is found and a trial is in order.


                                         688
                                APPENDIX T



10/07/19   First JC meeting. Record indicates there were 39 other JC
           meetings in the four months between October 17, 2019 and
           February 6, 2021.
10/08/19   The JC informed TE Wilbourne and the Session of Pacific
           Crossroads Church (“PCC”) of its investigation. The JC informed
           TE Wilbourne that allegations were made against him concerning
           his “dealings with the officers, staff and employees of PCC” but
           that it was “not ready to go into details about specific allegations
           nor ... to disclose names of those involved.” The JC requested the
           Session to provide it with every email and written document from
           its Session and staff for the past seven years, with no scope
           limitations or details regarding the allegations.

01/11/20   Three months after it informed TE Wilbourne of the investigation,
           the JC met with him for the first time. That was the JC’s 28th
           meeting. Prior to the meeting, he had requested permission to
           bring someone with him to the meeting, and the JC denied that
           request, as it continued to do with the same request for other
           meetings. TE Wilbourne was not informed of the specific
           accusations against him, nor were his accusers identified. He
           contends he was never informed of the names of the accusers.
           However, he was aware of tensions that had arisen in prior years
           between himself and former PCC staff. The Session was aware of
           these sins and failures, and TE Wilbourne committed to intensive
           Christian counseling, which led to a “plan of repentance.” He
           presented the JC with the plan of repentance he had been
           following, as well as a list of 40 witnesses whom he believed could
           provide the JC additional firsthand testimony about incidents he
           believed the JC might be investigating. However, the JC indicated
           it would not consult those witnesses.

01/23/20   Two days before Presbytery’s Stated Meeting, TE Wilbourne
           informed the JC by email that he wished to confess to matters
           related to the investigation and proceed as a BCO 38-1 case
           without process. The next day, the JC provided him a document
           titled “Working Draft of Potential Charges” and informed him that
           the JC had been intending to “bring charges” the following day at
           the Presbytery meeting. The JC informed Wilbourne it would give
           him two weeks to draft the BCO 38-1 “full statement of the facts”
           and that it would ask for a called meeting to be held two weeks
           after the Stated Meeting.


                                     689
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



01/25/20   Presbytery Stated Meeting. JC reported it had concluded there
           was a strong presumption of guilt, and was prepared to
           recommend indictment, but recommended Presbytery postpone
           action until a called meeting on Feb. 8. The JC reported:

               The Commission decided that if TE Wilbourne does,
               in fact, come as his own accuser that we would refrain
               from filing our charges. If he fails to come as his own
               accuser, we will proceed to file charges.

           Over the next two weeks, Wilbourne and the JC met three times
           and agreed on a seven-page “Statement of Facts and Confession
           of Guilt.” He also prepared an additional statement (called the
           “Voluntary Statement,” which included a four-page “Statement of
           Repentance” and a four-page “Commitment to Repentance”), and
           the JC agreed it could also be presented to Presbytery at the
           February 8 meeting.

02/08/20   Presbytery Called Meeting. The Moderator announced the order
           of business would be: “to hear the Judicial Commission’s report,
           to hear from TE Rankin Wilbourne, and then to move to
           consideration of the appropriate censure.” This was the first time
           Wilbourne was made aware the JC intended to read a detailed
           report. The JC’s six-page report was distributed and read aloud.
           On motion, Presbytery voted to “receive the report.” The JC then
           reported the following to Presbytery.

               According to BCO 38-1 it is necessary to prepare a
               "statement of facts" which is to be approved by both
               accused and the court. The Commission gave TE
               Wilbourne two weeks to write his confession, and it
               worked with him to produce a statement of facts which
               we could mutually approve, and which TE Wilbourne
               would present at a called meeting of Pacific Presbytery
               on February 8, 2020. [ROC 19]

           Wilbourne then read an eight-page “Statement of Facts and
           Confession of Guilt,” as well as the first four pages of an eight-
           page “Voluntary Statement” regarding repentance. Presbytery
           voted to receive each. Below is a summary.


                                     690
                    APPENDIX T



   1. “Statement of Facts and Confession of Guilt” -
      Confessed to sins in two areas:
          a) 6th Commandment - “I have lorded my authority
             over our staff in a domineering manner and have
             engaged in unrighteous anger,” listing nine
             examples;
          b) 9th Commandment - “I have engaged in lying,
             deceitful speech, and manipulative behavior,”
             listing eight examples.
          c) “Voluntary Confession of Guilt” - One-page,
             with six bullet points, each beginning with, “I
             confess that I ...”

   2.   “Voluntary Statement in Addition to My Confession”
          a) “Statement of Repentance” - Four pages.
          b) “Commitment to Repentance” - Four pages,
              which included 13 paragraphs, like “Weekly
              Counseling” and “Training in Conflict
              Management.” (Not read aloud, but “received”
              and included in Minutes.)

The Minutes record the following excerpts:

    “Moderator Bjerkaas then prayed for TE Wilbourne,
   after which TE Wilbourne was dismissed from the
   meeting.”

   “Lengthy debate then ensued as to whether TE
   Wilbourne's sins confessed in the Statement of Fact rise
   to the level of "base and flagitious." [BCO 34-7]

   “[JC member] TE Jason Park then brought the
   following motion: That the presbytery rule that the
   sins TE Wilbourne has confessed do rise to the level
   of base and flagitious. The motion was seconded by
   TE Jerrard Heard.”

   “As ballots were being distributed, Moderator
   Bjerkaas reminded the court of the motion before them
   is to rule that the sins confessed by TE Wilbourne be
   found to rise to the level of base and flagitious. Upon
                        691
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



              voting, the motion passed, with 21 for, 11 against, and
              1 abstention.”

              “At 11:00 am, TE Jason Park brought the following
              motion: That TE Rankin Wilbourne be deposed from
              the ministry. The motion was seconded by [JC
              member] TE Jeff Tell. Following lengthy, passionate,
              and often times emotional debate, various points of
              clarification and points of order, and some statements
              not directly pertaining to the Statement of Facts being
              ruled out of order by the Moderator, TE Jason Park
              called the question. Upon voting, the calling of the
              question was sustained. TE Kyle Wells requested
              prayer, which Moderator Bjerkaas led. Moderator
              Bjerkaas reminded the court of the motion before
              them: That TE Rankin Wilbourne be deposed from the
              ministry. Upon voting, the motion passed, with 21
              votes for, 10 against, and no abstentions.”

04/05/20   Wilbourne filed Complaint with Presbytery, alleging four
           “primary constitutional violations” (1-4) and three “secondary
           violations,” (5-7) followed by fuller explanations of each.
           Emphasis below was original.

              1. At the called meeting of Presbytery on February 8,
                 2020, the Judicial Commission was allowed to
                 read a detailed report, prior to my 38-1 confession,
                 that was not agreed upon. The reading of this
                 report was improper and inconsistent with BCO
                 38-1, allowing for injustice in the judgment and
                 censure of the complainant.
              2. The Presbytery ruled that my confessed sins were
                 "base and flagitious," (BCO 34-7) when they are
                 not rightly categorized as such.
              3. The court neglected to consider the question of my
                 repentance as they were obligated to do.
              4. The Commission and Presbytery ignored BCO 32-
                 20, namely that the court should limit its focus to
                 offenses in the space of the last year, unless they
                 have 'recently become flagrant'. They had not
                 recently become flagrant, nor did my confession
                                   692
                                APPENDIX T



                  show that they had, nor did the Commission make
                  the case that they had. Constitutionally, offenses
                  from several years ago should only be admissible
                  if the court can prove the pattern persists and had
                  recently become flagrant.
               5. During the Judicial Commission's investigation, I
                  was repeatedly denied reasonable opportunities to
                  defend myself.
               6. The Judicial Commission prejudiced the Presbytery
                  by claiming they had spoken to people on "both
                  sides" as well as claiming they had spoken to
                  everyone "in the room" at particular incidents.
                  This is not true.
               7. Throughout this process, Matthew 18 has not been
                  followed, "as required by Christ" (BCO 31-5).

04/05/20   Session of PCC filed a six-page Complaint with Presbytery
           alleging five “Failures in Interpretation of the Constitution of the
           Church,” shown below.

               1. Submission of a Judicial Commission Report that
                  inappropriately charged the Confessor and
                  influenced the judgment of Presbytery.
               2. In both its written report and during deliberations,
                  the Judicial Commission made inaccurate
                  statements that influenced Presbytery’s judgment.
               3. The Presbytery incorrectly ruled that TE
                  Wilbourne’s confessed sins were “Base and
                  Flagitious.”
               4. The Sins were not recent.
               5. Other Concerns.

04/07/20   TEs Gendall, Hightower and Lien filed a 10-page Complaint
           with Presbytery alleging six “Constitutional Concerns and
           Violations,” shown below. Emphasis was original, and indicated
           the sections alleged to be violated.

               1. BCO 40-4: Courts may sometimes entirely neglect
                  to perform their duty ... ln any of these cases their
                  records will by no means exhibit to the higher court
                  a full view of their proceedings. If therefore, the
                                     693
   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   next higher court be well advised that any such
   neglect or irregularity has occurred on the part of
   the lower court, it is incumbent on it to take
   cognizance of the same, and to examine, deliberate
   and judge in the whole matter as completely as if it
   had been recorded, and thus brought up by review
   of its records.
2. BCO 38-1. When any person shall come forward
   and make his offense known to the court, a full
   statement of the facts shall be recorded and
   judgment rendered without process. In handling a
   confession of guilt, it is essential that the person
   intends to confess and permit the court to render
   judgment without process. Statements made by him
   in the presence of the court must not be taken as a
   basis of a judgment without process except by his
   consent. In the event a confession is intended, a full
   statement of the facts should be approved by the
   accused, and by the court, before the court proceeds
   to a judgment. The accused has the right of
   complaint against the judgment.
3. BCO 34-7: the court erred procedurally and
   factually in its declaration of "base & flagitious."
4. BCO 32-20: The court failed to properly consider
   BCO 32-20, especially that process ... shall
   commence within the space of one year after the
   offense was committed, unless it has recently
   become flagrant.
5. BCO 27-5 & 31-5: According to BCO 27-5, steps
   A-D of the proper disciplinary principles set forth
   in Scripture must be followed - whether the sins be
   general or specific, public or private. That did not
   happen.
6. BCO 31-8: Great caution should be exercised in
   receiving accusations from any person who is
   known to indulge a malignant spirit toward the
   accused ... [or] who is deeply interested in any
   respect in the conviction of the accused.




                      694
                               APPENDIX T



07/18/20   Presbytery Called Meeting. Presbytery debated and denied the
           three Complaints by the following votes: Wilbourne (15-19-1),
           PCC Session (14-21), and Gendall, Hightower & Lien (13-21).

08/04/20   TEs Gendall, Hightower, and Lien carried their Complaint to the
           SJC.

08/05/20   Wilbourne carried his seven-page Complaint to the SJC, with 70
           pages of attachments.

08/13/20   PCC Session carried its Complaint to the SJC.

09/16/20   SJC Officers rule Case administratively in order and randomly
           drew the Panel, which included TE Greco, TE Cannata and RE S.
           Duncan, with alternates TE Ellis and RE Donahoe.

09/17/20   Panel members were notified of their appointment and received
           the ROC for three related Complaints against the decision of
           Pacific Presbytery: Cases 2020-07 Wilbourne (ROC 300 pages),
           2020-08 TEs Gendall, Hightower & Lien ( ROC 252 pages), and
           2020-09 Session of Pacific Crossroads (ROC 228 pages).

10/06/20   Panel Constituting Meeting. TE Greco was elected as chairman
           and RE S. Duncan as secretary. Panel decided to send the Parties
           copies of the SJC’s July 2020 Decision in Case 2019-10 Evans v.
           Arizona, and its August 2020 Decision in Case 2020-04 Williams
           v. Chesapeake, since they were just recently decided, and both
           involved BCO 38-1.

10/29/20   Presbytery Representatives filed a motion asking the Panel to rule
           all the Cases out-of-order. They alleged Cases 2020-08 and 2020-
           09 were out of order because those Complainants lacked standing
           because the final sentence of BCO 38-1 purportedly restricts such
           a complaint to the accused: “The accused has the right of
           complaint against the judgment.” They also contended Case
           2020-07 was out of order, for the following reason: “[T]he relief
           being sought in the complaint goes beyond the specific issue that
           can be raised under BCO 38-1. The only issue the accused can
           complain against is the judgment: “The accused has the right of
           complaint against the judgment.” ” (Emphasis original.)


                                    695
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



11/03/20   Chairman notifies the Presbytery Representative that the motions
           will be considered after the Record of the Case has been finalized.

01/15/21   Panel notified the Parties of its decision on the ROC objections,
           sent a Revised ROC dated January 15, and notified the Parties the
           Hearing would be via GoToMeeting on February 22. Panel
           notified the Parties it denied Respondent’s October 29 motions to
           dismiss the three Complaints, providing rationale.
01/28/21   Panel received the Complainant’s 10-page Preliminary Brief.

02/10/21   Panel received the        Presbytery    Representative’s    10-page
           Preliminary Brief.

02/22/21   Complaint Hearing via GoToMeeting. Present were Panel
           members TE Greco, TE Cannata, and RE S. Duncan, along with
           alternates TE Ellis and RE Donahoe. Complainants present
           included Mr. Wilbourne, RE Ozbolt, TE Gendall, TE Lien and TE
           Hightower. The Complainants’ Representative was TE Larry
           Hoop. Presbytery’s Representatives were TE Tell and TE Park.

04/01/21   Panel filed Decision with SJC.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE

   Did Presbytery clearly err on February 8, 2020, in how it handled a BCO
   38-1 Case Without Process, and previously in how a BCO 31-2
   investigation was conducted?

III. JUDGMENT

   Yes. Therefore, the Complaint is sustained, and the censure of deposition
   is annulled.

IV. REASONING

   Our Book of Church Order calls on higher courts ordinarily to show great
   deference lower courts in factual matters (BCO 39-3(2)) and in matters of
   discretion and judgment, including the administration of censures (BCO
   39-3(3)), unless there is clear error on the part of the lower court. In this
   case, the lower court clearly erred in its actions arising from a BCO 38-1
   confession. Those errors were prejudicial to the accused and require that
   the Complaint in Case No. 2020-07 be sustained.

                                     696
                             APPENDIX T



The six-page Judicial Commission report was more than just a “record of
its proceedings ... submitted to the court appointing it.” (BCO 15-1) It
contained significant assertions against and opinions regarding TE
Wilbourne. Because the JC presented this new and prejudicial material in
addition to the agreed-upon Statement of the Facts and Confession, the
process violated the provisions of BCO 38-1. If the JC and Presbytery had
followed the provisions of BCO 38-1, the presbyters would have seen and
heard only the seven-page Statement of Facts and Confession that was
agreed to by the minister and the JC. Presbytery could then have properly
proceeded to decide which of the censures of BCO 30 was warranted.

Instead of trying to re-do that procedure, and because TE Wilbourne’s
confession still exists, the SJC recommends the censure be regarded as
definite suspension from office (BCO 30-3). In other words, this Decision
restores him to the status of a minister in good standing in Pacific
Presbytery, without call, having made a BCO 38-1 confession and having
practically served a 17-month suspension from office. Alternatively,
Presbytery is not prohibited from considering TE Wilbourne’s BCO 38-1
confession, as the sole basis for imposing a BCO 30 censure. Additionally,
TE Wilbourne is not prohibited from withdrawing his BCO 38-1
confession, at which point Presbytery would need to decide whether to
take no further action or determine whether a strong presumption of guilt
exists warranting the appointment of a prosecutor, an indictment, and trial.

Rather than have TE Wilbourne consider another BCO 38-1 confession
and statement of facts and have the Presbytery consider again the censure
it would impose, we believe the cause of justice will be served by a de
facto 17-month definite suspension from office. Therefore, if Presbytery
believes a new or greater censure is warranted than the past 17-month
suspension, it should find a strong presumption of guilt, bring an
indictment against TE Wilbourne, and proceed to a trial. The SJC is not
recommending any further censure or an indictment and trial. The SJC
recommends Presbytery consider the matter closed.

The SJC is not annulling Presbytery’s dissolution of the minister’s call.

Finally, there were also several other irregularities alleged in the three
Complaints, and they are briefly addressed below.

1. There seemed to be a misunderstanding about what a commission
   delivers to a presbytery. BCO 15-1 stipulates: “A commission shall
                                  697
               MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   keep a full record of its proceedings, which shall be submitted to the
   court appointing it. Upon such submission this record shall be entered
   on the minutes of the court appointing ...” Thus, a BCO 15-1
   commission does not typically present a report to presbytery, because
   it acts as the presbytery on the matter assigned to it. It simply submits
   (files) a record of its proceedings for the records of presbytery.
   Ordinarily, a presbytery doesn’t “consider” a report from a
   commission, unless it’s a BCO 15-3 commission that tried a judicial
   case and is presenting a non-debatable recommendation on the
   judgment. In other words, the BCO did not require Pacific Presbytery
   to hear the JC’s six-page “report.” No motion is needed for the “record
   of the proceedings” of a commission to be entered into Presbytery
   records. The JC’s record of its proceedings should simply have been
   filed with the Presbytery Clerk after the meeting, or at least after the
   decision on censure. In addition, the motion adopted by Presbytery to
   “receive the Judicial Commission’s report as presented” was out of
   order. Even if the JC’s presentation could legitimately be regarded as
   a “report,” reports are automatically received when presented, and the
   motion was thereby unnecessary and probably confusing. (RONR
   (12th ed.) 51:9, 51:15)

2. Early in the process, the SJC Panel ensured Presbytery’s
   Representative received a copy of the SJC’s July 2020 Decision in
   Case 2019-10: TE Evans v. Arizona, another Case involving BCO 38-
   1 decided three months earlier. The Presbytery Representatives should
   have regarded the SJC Decision in Evans as “establishing a principle”
   that “may be appealed to in subsequent similar cases.” (BCO 14-7) A
   major procedural issue in both Cases was clearly similar, but the
   Presbytery’s Representatives disagreed. They claimed the facts of the
   Cases were substantially different and contended Arizona’s
   commission reporting was faulty because it came after the confession
   was read, but Pacific’s came before. We do not agree with
   Respondent’s attempt to distinguish this case from Evans. BCO 38-1
   does not address the time at which additional adverse information
   might be presented; it prohibits the introduction of any information
   adverse to the accused to the court beyond the agreed upon statement
   of facts at any point prior to the decision on censure. Hearing a
   negative report before hearing a man’s confession is more prejudicial




                                 698
                                     APPENDIX T



          than after, given the importance of first impressions. 2 In addition,
          Presbytery’s Representative contended the minister was free to change
          his mind after hearing the negative JC report, and ask for a trial
          instead. While that would have been constitutionally permissible for
          him to do, we find Presbytery’s contention implausible and at odds
          with the procedure outlined in BCO 38-1.

      3. In its deliberations on censure, Presbytery spent much time on BCO
         34-7 discussing whether the confessed offenses rose to the level of
         being “base and flagitious.”

               BCO 34-7. When a minister, pending a trial, shall make
               confession, if the matter be base and flagitious, such as
               drunkenness, uncleanness, or crimes of a greater nature,
               however penitent he may appear to the satisfaction of all,
               the court shall without delay impose definite suspension or
               depose him from the ministry.

          It should be noted that this was not time well spent. It is clear that
          consideration of BCO 34-7 was not applicable to any censure
          consideration because there was no trial pending.

          Nevertheless, Presbytery’s Representative reported that a BCO 38-1
          document in the online Presbytery Clerk’s Handbook defines base as
          “vile, contemptible” and defines flagitious as “heinous,
          extraordinarily wicked, flagrantly wicked.” However, the disclaimer
          in that document is relevant:

               “Interpretations of The Book of Church Order ... by the
               Stated Clerk ... or staff members of the Office of the Stated
               Clerk are for information only, however, and are not
               authoritative rulings that may only be made by courts of
               the Church. ... Parties to potential cases or cases in process

2
    In his paper titled, Avoiding Procedural Errors in Judicial Cases, Stated Clerk
    Emeritus Dr. Roy Taylor includes this statement: “It is unwise for a Shepherding
    Committee to report prior to a BCO 38-1 procedure, because that would violate the
    BCO 38-1 rights of the self-accused person that only the statement of facts that he
    has approved and the sins to which he confesses may be used by the court to decide
    on a censure.” However, it is more than just unwise. It will often constitute
    reversible error, as it did in this Case.

                                          699
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



              are responsible for their own constitutional and procedural
              knowledge and understanding.”

         When interpreting a word in a constitution or a law, it is important to
         try to understand the meaning the word had at the time the document
         was written.3 Because the words base and flagitious date back to the
         1879 PCUS Book of Order, it would be more accurate to use a
         resource like the Oxford English Dictionary, which shows usage at
         various times in history, rather than something like the Merriam-
         Webster 2021 dictionary.4

         More importantly, context is critical. Regardless of how the two
         words are defined, it is unusual for the BCO to say repentance is
         immaterial when deciding censure. For example, we would not
         ordinarily say repentance is immaterial in cases of drunkenness or
         uncleanness. However, if those sins resulted in public scandal, we
         might say that. Thus, it seems the main purpose of BCO 34-7 is the
         removal of public scandal achieved by definite suspension or
         deposition. If the offenses of drunkenness or uncleanness do not create
         a public scandal, then the BCO would allow the court to consider
         repentance and all degrees of censures. This might also explain why
         indefinite suspension is not mentioned as an option in BCO 34-7, even
         though one might argue it’s often a harsher censure than definite
         suspension, because the duration is unknown. Further, BCO 34-7
         explicitly applies only to ministers, presumably because their sins will
         be more likely to create a public scandal than those of elders and other
         church members. This does not mean the censure of deposition was
         unwarranted for the offense confessed. It just means Presbytery’s

3
  “The theory of originalism treats a constitution like a statute, giving the constitution
  the meaning that its words were understood to bear at the time they were
  promulgated. ... If you don't take the words of the Constitution and what they were
  originally understood to mean, what is the standard? The answer is, there isn't any
  standard.... [T]he only sensible way to construe a constitution is the way you
  construe statutes. What did its words mean when they were adopted?” Justice
  Antonin Scalia, “Judicial Adherence to the Text of our Basic Law: A Theory of
  Constitutional Interpretation.” Speech at the Catholic University of America,
  October 18, 1996.
4
  https://www.oed.com/ In the Institutes, Calvin uses the word flagitious to refer to
  the “incestuous Corinthian,” David’s sin with Bathsheba, murder, the public
  “worship of images,” and “the sin against the Holy Ghost.”


                                           700
                                    APPENDIX T



         misreading of BCO 34-7 resulted in an error in ignoring any
         consideration of repentance when deciding censure.

    4. BCO 38-1 envisions a single document. It does not envision what we
       had in this Case, which included a seven-page Statement of Facts and
       Confession of Guilt and an eight-page Voluntary Statement (four-page
       Statement of Repentance and four-page Commitment to Repentance).
       Whatever single document is agreed to by the confessor and the court
       should include all the material necessary for the court to render a
       decision on censure. That way, the presbyters simply need to read the
       single document to be ready to vote.5
    5. Accused persons are permitted counsel or assistance at any point in
       the investigative process, not just at trial. The accused minister
       repeatedly requested to bring someone with him to the interviews with
       the investigative Commission, but the Commission incorrectly ruled
       that BCO 32-19 only allows counsel during a trial. Absent some
       compelling reason, it is unreasonable to prohibit an accused person
       from bringing his counsel with him to an investigative interview.
       Besides, experienced counsel can often help a commission or court
       avoid procedural mistakes. 6

    6. A fundamental goal of any BCO 31-2 investigation is to determine
       whether the accused has “satisfactory explanations concerning reports
       affecting their Christian character.” But in this Case, Presbytery’s
       investigative Commission did not interview the accused until its 28th


5
  The 2021 Presbytery Clerk’s Handbook prepared by the PCA Clerk’s office
  recommends the use of an additional, separate document, which it calls the
  Voluntary Statement in Addition to the Required Statement of Facts and Confession
  of Guilt. (See pages 226 and 228 at https://www.pcaac.org/wp-content/uploads
  /2020/12/2021-Presbytery-Clerks-Handbook.pdf ). However, it would seem
  prudent for such a repentance statement to be included in the mutually agreed-upon
  single document.
6
  Robert’s Rules stipulates: "An investigative committee appointed as described
  above has no power to require the accused, or any other person, to appear before it,
  but it should quietly conduct a complete investigation, making an effort to learn all
  relevant facts. Information obtained in strict confidence may help the committee to
  form an opinion, but it may not be reported to the society or used in a trial—except
  as may be possible without bringing out the confidential particulars." (RONR (12th
  ed.) 63:12)


                                         701
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        meeting - three months after they informed him there were
        accusations. That was neither wise nor just. Had the Commission
        interviewed the accused sooner, given him specifics about the
        allegations, and allowed his Session and PCC staff leadership to also
        speak as they requested, the following proceedings might have been
        avoided.

The Complaint in Case No. 2020-07 is sustained, and the censure outlined in
   that case is annulled. The Complaints in Case Nos. 2020-08 and 2020-09
   are sustained and answered by reference to this decision.

This Panel Decision was drafted by RE Howie Donahoe, amended and
unanimously approved by the Panel, with amendments by the full SJC. The
SJC approved the decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur         M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur            S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Absent
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Absent                 Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur         Greco Concur                 Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur         Kooistra Absent              Terrell Disqual.
      Coffin Concur          Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur         Lucas Absent                 White Concur
      Dowling Concur         McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (19-0-0)

RE Terrell disqualified himself because of his personal relationship to the
Appellant and Appellant’s father-in-law. OMSJC 2.10(d).


                      CASE NO. 2020-06
                    BRIAN PAUL GORDON
                            V.
             SOUTHERN NEW ENGLAND PRESBYTERY
                    DECISION ON APPEAL
                      OCTOBER 21, 2021

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

The Appellant was charged by the Session of his church with failing to keep
his membership vows by not attending church for more than one year and
failing to submit to the Session in its recommendations regarding his conduct,
                                     702
                                 APPENDIX T



his marriage and his family. At trial, the Appellant admitted that the charges
were “true”. The Appellant was found guilty at trial. On appeal, the
Presbytery affirmed the decision of the lower court. The Appellant appealed
the Presbytery’s decision to the General Assembly.

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

03/11/15    The Session of First Presbyterian Church North Shore (FPCNS;
            an OPC congregation at that time) sent Mr. Gordon a letter of
            admonishment regarding his treatment of his wife. Mr. Gordon
            disagreed with the admonishment and informed the Session that
            he intends to leave the church.

11/20/15    Session of FPCNS sent a communication to Mr. Gordon to
            encourage him to take steps to heal his marriage and return to
            worship.

01/14/16    Mr. Gordon wrote to the Session that his plan was to withdraw his
            membership and inform them when he joined another church.
            Note: The Session did not remove his name. FPCNS was a
            member of the OPC at this time. According to the Session, the
            OPC Rules of Discipline do not allow such a withdrawal, unless
            “the member informs the session that he does not desire to remain
            in the fellowship of the OPC, in other words the denomination as
            a whole, rather than just this particular church.”

12/11/16    The Congregation of FPCNS voted to join the PCA

12/29/16    Commission of SNEP concluded their interviews with the Ruling
            Elders of FPCNS. Interviews were conducted in accordance with
            BCO 13-8. The Commission concluded that the Ruling Elders
            understand and can sincerely adopt the doctrines and polity of the
            Presbyterian Church in America as contained in its Constitution.

01/27/17    FPCNS Teaching Elders were examined and received into SNEP

04/28/17    SNEP received FPCNS into the PCA. Mr. Gordon was a member
            of FPCNS when the church was received into the PCA.

05/06/17    The FCPNS Session sent a letter to Mr. Gordon asking him to re-
            establish contact with the Session, heed their admonishments and
                                     703
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           return to Lord’s Day worship at FPCNS. The letter warned Mr.
           Gordon that failure to comply could result in additional
           disciplinary actions.

01/15/19   The Session of FCPNS conducted the trial of Mr. Gordon. He was
           found guilty of “failure to heed the admonition of the session,”
           and failure to follow the membership vow 5 of the OPC and
           membership vows 4 & 5 of the PCA.” . Mr. Gordon was
           indefinitely suspended from the table.

05/14/19   The Session of FPCNS voted to impose the censure of
           excommunication, because the Session found that Mr. Gordon’s
           conduct warranted the greater censure. (BCO 30-3).

08/12/19   FPCNS sent a letter to Mr. Gordon notifying him that the censure
           had been changed to excommunication. Mr. Gordon received the
           notice from FPCNS regarding his excommunication on
           8/16/2019.

09/10/19   Mr. Gordon submitted notice to the Stated Clerk of Southern New
           England Presbytery (SNEP) that he was appealing the decision.
           The grounds of his appeal were that “they have disregarded all of
           the very considerable evidence which would have not only
           exonerated me of the chargers [sic] they leveled against me, but
           would actually constitute sufficient grounds for me to bring
           charges against them.”

03/06/20   SNEP’s Commission heard the appeal.

06/27/20   SNEP heard the report of the Commission at a Called meeting.
           SNEP voted in favor of the Commission’s recommendation and
           denied the appeal.

07/24/20   The Stated Clerk of the PCA received the appeal from Mr.
           Gordon.

04/15/20   The panel conducted the hearing. Panel members were RE E. J.
           Nusbaum (chairman), RE Jack Wilson (secretary) and TE Charles
           McGowan. TE Paul Lee (alternate) was also present.



                                   704
                                 APPENDIX T



II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

  Did SNEP err on June 27, 2020, in approving the recommendation of its
  Judicial Commission’s decision to deny Mr. Brian Gordon’s appeal?

III. JUDGMENT

  No.

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

  The Appellant has not presented any evidence that sustain the
  specifications of error that he has alleged. The Appellant did not “specify”
  an error in the conduct of the trial, the admission of evidence, or the
  Presbytery’s review on appeal. The Appellant failed to identify any error
  with particularity. Instead, he recited the general grounds for appeal
  outlined in BCO 42-3. We believe this vague and non-specific recitation
  of general grounds for appeal could be said to be inadequate to identify
  any particular error with specificity. While the SJC has summarily
  adjudicated at least one recent case for such lack of specificity (See 2019-
  05, Goggan v. Missouri Presbytery), we review each of the Appellant’s
  “specifications” below in an abundance of fairness.

  A. Failing to Grant a Reasonable Indulgence

        The Presbytery granted the Appellant a reasonable indulgence by
        resetting the date of the hearing. This specification is not supported
        by the Record and is not sustained.

  B. Hurrying to a decision

        The Appellant did not identify any specific act or omission by the
        lower court or the Session in support of this specification. The Session
        waited approximately twenty (20) months between offering its
        admonition and proceeding to trial. After the trial and censure, the
        Session waited an additional five (5) months before proceeding to
        excommunication because the Appellant never returned to church
        attendance. This timeline does not indicate any improper rush to a
        decision. This specification is not supported by the Record and is not
        sustained.


                                      705
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   C. Exhibiting Prejudice

       The Appellant has not identified any specific act or omission by the
       lower court or the Session in support of this specification. While the
       Appellant contends that the Session took his wife’s side in his divorce,
       he did not identify any error in the conduct of the trial amounting to
       prejudice. He also failed to identify any prejudicial act by the
       Presbytery in considering his appeal. This specification is not
       supported by the Record and is not sustained.

   D    Exhibiting Injustice

       Again, the Appellant has failed to identify any specific erroneous act
       or omission from the trial or the appeal in support of this vague
       allegation. At trial, in his brief and oral argument to Presbytery, and
       in oral argument to the Panel in this case, the Appellant admitted that
       the trial court’s charges against him were true. The Appellant
       indicated that he did not call witnesses at trial because their testimony
       would have provided further proof of his guilt. The Appellant made
       clear that he wished to present evidence not directly related to the
       charges against him but bearing on the actions of his wife or the
       circumstances of his marriage. Since Appellant chose not to tender
       such evidence at trial to support his defense, it is impossible to
       evaluate whether it would have been admissible, and if so, whether it
       would have been exculpatory. On appeal, the higher court cannot
       consider or evaluate evidence not presented at trial. This specification
       is not supported by the Record and is not sustained.

       While a number of defenses at trial and arguments on appeal may have
       been available to the Appellant, we limit our review to those issues
       actually presented by the parties in the lower courts and decline to
       speculate regarding matters not raised by the parties in the lower
       courts. BCO 39-3(1).

   The decision of SNEP is affirmed, and the appeal is denied.

The Panel decision was written by RE EJ Nusbaum and RE Jack Wilson and
edited and approved by the panel 3-0-0. The SJC amended and approved the
decision on the following roll call vote:



                                     706
                                     APPENDIX T



        Bankson Concur          M. Duncan Concur               Neikirk Concur
        Bise Dissent            S. Duncan Concur               Nusbaum Concur
        Cannata Concur          Ellis Concur                   Pickering Concur
        Carrell Concur          Greco Concur                   Ross Dissent
        Chapell Concur          Kooistra Concur                Terrell Concur
        Coffin Concur           Lee Concur                     Waters Concur
        Donahoe Dissent         Lucas Absent                   White Absent
        Dowling Dissent         McGowan Concur                 Wilson Concur
        (18-4-0)

                               Dissenting Opinion
                              Of RE Howie Donahoe

I dissented from the Decision because the SJC (1) should have ruled the
Appeal administratively out of order for lack of standing and (2) should have
ruled that the Session did not retain jurisdiction over Mr. Gordon when First
Presbyterian Church North Shore left the OPC and joined the PCA and thus
had no jurisdiction to conduct the trial. The Record does not demonstrate Mr.
Gordon ever became a PCA member or was ever under the jurisdiction of a
PCA Session.

The matter is complicated by Mr. Gordon having participated in a PCA trial
even though he had repeatedly maintained he was not leaving the OPC. And
he did not raise the jurisdictional question in his appeal. However, his
September 2021 Supplemental Brief indicates that at the time of the church’s
departure from OPC, he was unfamiliar with the OPC rule for how members
could remain in the OPC.

Regardless, the higher court must always verify jurisdiction and standing
before adjudicating a case, even if neither party raises the issue. This is a
critical part of what’s considered when a higher court determines if a case is
administratively in order. When BCO 39-3.1 stipulates, “A higher court,
reviewing a lower court, should limit itself to the issues raised by the parties
to the case in the original [lower] court,” it’s not referring to jurisdiction or
standing.7
7
    SJC Manual 9.1 stipulates: “When a judicial case is submitted to the Commission,
    the Officers shall make an initial determination as to whether the case is
    administratively in order. (a) A case is administratively in order if the relevant
    provisions of BCO 41, 42, and 43 have been followed.” The “relevant provisions”
    would include jurisdiction and standing. There is precedent for the SJC ruling
    complaints out of order for lack of standing. See, for example, these seven cases:
    92-9b Overman v. E. Carolina, 2015-03 Gearhart v. Chicago Metro, 2012-06 Bethel
                                          707
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Here is a summary chronology. In March 2015, about two years before
FPCNS joined the PCA and four years before the PCA trial, the OPC Session
of FPCNS “admonished” Mr. Gordon in a letter regarding matters related to
his marriage. It’s important to note that in one procedural way, admonition is
different in the OPC than in the PCA. An OPC Session can impose the censure
of admonition without a confession of guilt or a guilty verdict at trial. (OPC
Book of Discipline 3.6) However, the censure of admonition is not an on-going
status. It’s administered at one point in time. The OPC BCO does not mention
the “removal” of an admonition as it does other censures. Nor does a PCA
Session vote to remove the censure of admonition at some point in the future,
as it would with other censures. (BCO 37)

Below are the OPC Session’s recommendations in its March 2015 letter sent
four years before the PCA trial, in which it admonished him to “repent of
harshness to his wife.” [ROC 12]

        ... It is also our responsibility as your shepherds in the Lord to
        help guide you in a path of repentance, healing, and
        reconciliation. In order to help you do so we give you the
        following recommendations.
             l. Begin marriage counseling with [the wife] as soon as
                 possible with a counselor of our recommendation.
             2. Meet with Elder ___ for discipleship and
                 accountability.
             3. Seek individual professional counseling.
             4. Limit your conversations about your circumstances
                 with only 2 or 3 people including ___ but not including
                 the pastor, elders or [the wife].

Eleven days later, on March 22, 2015, Mr. Gordon wrote the OPC Session,
saying,

        I have determined before the Lord that my family needs to
        leave FPC. We will be looking for another Presbyterian
        Church to join, preferably within the OPC. ...We will begin
        our search for a different OPC church immediately and will
        be seeking membership there.” [ROC 16]

  v. SE Alabama, 2012-08 Jackson v. NW Georgia, 2019-13 Benyola v. Central
  Florida, 2019-14 McWilliams v. SW Florida, and 2020-01 Benyola v. Central
  Florida.

                                       708
                                   APPENDIX T



He began attending worship elsewhere, and in January 2016, ten months after
the admonition, he asked to be removed from the rolls of FPCNS OPC. The
OPC Session declined the request on two grounds: (1) their contention that Mr.
Gordon was still “under discipline” and (2) their understanding that the OPC
Book allowed them to retain someone under discipline unless that person was
leaving the OPC.

A year later, FPCNS left the OPC and was received into the PCA by the S.
New England Presbytery in January 2017.8 Four months after joining the
PCA, the Session wrote Mr. Gordon and exhorted him to worship at FPCNS
PCA - even though he had clearly said in March 2015 and again in January
2016, that he was planning to worship elsewhere in the OPC.

In January 2019 — two years after leaving the OPC — the PCA Session put
Mr. Gordon on trial and convicted him on two charges — “failure to heed the
admonition of the session” and “failure to follow the membership vow 5 of the
OPC and membership vows 4 and 5 of the PCA.” He was judged guilty on
both and suspended from the sacraments. Four months later, the Session
excommunicated him.

When Your Church Changes Denominations and You Don’t Want to
Follow

Again, we note Mr. Gordon complicated jurisdictional questions by appearing
at the trial before the PCA Session. But his error does not thereby impart
jurisdiction. For example, it would be illegitimate for my PCA Session to put
my Methodist neighbor on trial, regardless of whether he chooses to
participate.

The OPC Session clearly understood Mr. Gordon desired to stay, and intended
to stay, in the OPC. This was clear in the OPC Session Moderator’s email to
him in April 2015 - three years before the PCA trial.

               With regard to the substance of your request [to be
          removed from the rolls of FPCNS], however, the [OPC] Book
          of Discipline does not permit your erasure under these
          circumstances. Your request, as we understand it, was specific
          to withdrawing from membership at First Presbyterian Church

8
    PCA Stated Clerk’s Report, M46GA, p. 89


                                       709
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        North Shore [OPC]. Under Chapter V(2)(a)(2) of the [OPC]
        Book of Discipline, however, such an erasure can only be
        performed where the member informs the session that he does
        not desire to remain in the fellowship of the Orthodox
        Presbyterian Church, in other words the denomination as a
        whole, rather than just this particular church.
             I am, of course, not in a position to suggest what the
        Session would decide, but am able to communicate that
        should you make the request based on your desire to no longer
        remain in the fellowship of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church
        as a whole we would docket the matter for consideration at a
        regular Session meeting. (Emphasis added.) [ROC 45]

Thus, it was clear to the OPC Session that Mr. Gordon did not intend to leave
the OPC, which is why the Session believed they could retain them on the rolls
of FPCNS OPC. The Record does not indicate Mr. Gordon ever attended
FPCNS after it became a PCA church.
Furthermore, as far as Mr. Gordon’s OPC membership was concerned, the
OPC Session apparently failed to comply with the OPC rules for withdrawing.
Below is an excerpt from the OPC Form of Government, Chapter 16 regarding
congregational meetings held to withdraw from the OPC. Note the italicized
requirement at the end regarding members who wish to remain in the OPC.

    7. A congregation may withdraw from the OPC only according
       to the following procedure:
       a. Before calling a congregational meeting for the purpose of
            taking any action contemplating withdrawal from the
            Orthodox Presbyterian Church, the session shall inform
            the presbytery, ordinarily at a stated meeting, of its
            intention to call such a meeting, and shall provide grounds
            for its intention. The presbytery, through representatives
            appointed for the purpose, shall seek, within a period not
            to exceed three weeks after the presbytery meeting, in
            writing and in person, to dissuade the session from its
            intention. If the session is not dissuaded, it may issue a
            written call for the first meeting of the congregation. The
            call shall contain the session’s recommendation, with its
            written grounds, together with the presbytery’s written
            argument.
       b. If the vote of the congregation favors withdrawal, the
            session shall call for a second meeting to be held not less
                                     710
                                     APPENDIX T



              than three weeks, nor more than one year, thereafter. If the
              congregation, at the second meeting, reaffirms a previous
              action to withdraw, it shall be the duty of the presbytery to
              prepare a roll of members who desire to continue as
              members of the OPC and to provide oversight of these
              continuing        members.         (Emphasis         added.)
              https://www.opc.org/BCO/FG.html#Chapter_XVI

There is no evidence in the Record that the OPC Session helped arranged for
such a remain-in-the-OPC option roll or that the OPC Presbytery of NY and
New England required such. In the Minutes of the FPCNS congregational
meeting of December 11, 2016, there is no mention of this remain-in-the-OPC
option for those who voted against joining the PCA. [ROC 214] Granted, if
Mr. Gordon had been familiar with this section of the OPC BCO, perhaps he
could have directly petitioned the OPC Presbytery to retain his OPC
membership at large. But the real responsibility lay with the departing Session
and the OPC Presbytery. Had the rules been followed, Mr. Gordon would have
been placed on the rolls of the OPC at large and would have been removed
from the rolls of FPCNS when it joined the PCA.

This should have been clear to the Session. In an August 4, 2021, post-Appeal-
hearing email to the SJC Panel Chairman, FPCNS RE Joss stated the
following:

          There is a provision in the OPC Book of Church Order
          (XVI.7.b) for individual members who object to the church
          leaving the denomination to be taken under care of the
          presbytery. This did not happen with [Mr. Gordon] so he was
          still a member when we came into the PCA. [226]

But that August email does not indicate why this did not happen, nor does it
indicate Mr. Gordon was aware of, or was informed of, the OPC provision. In
his September 28, 2021 Supplemental Brief, Mr. Gordon included excerpts
from emails he sent to the Panel in August and September in which he
reiterated the Session knew he wanted to stay in the OPC and not join the
PCA.9

9
    The Record of the Case was deemed complete by the Panel on March 1, 2021, and
    the Panel Hearing was on April 15. The Record was later revised on August 12, and
    finally on September 1 with the addition of 14 pages. [ROC 214-227] The Panel’s
    final proposed decision is dated September 7. Mr. Gordon’s Supp Brief contained

                                         711
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




        I vigorously resisted their decision to switch their
        denominational affiliation... [P]rior to RE Walters’ note, the
        session had sent [name omitted] ... on a fact-finding mission
        concerning how I felt about FPCNS leaving the OPC for the
        PCA. [That person] knew exactly and with what vehemence I
        opposed such a transition and communicated this to [RE
        Walters] and the members of the Session. ... RE Walters knew
        that I had no intention of leaving the OPC but rather only
        leaving FPCNS because it had left the OPC ... [T]here is plenty
        of evidence in proof of exactly what my intention was and why.
        So, it was never my intention to leave the OPC: it was my
        intention to leave FPCNS only because of their poor treatment
        of my family and their decision to leave the OPC ... In short,
        my desire for erasure was not from the OPC but from FPCNS
        precisely because they planned to transition to the PCA; ... I
        was not interested in erasure [from the OPC]; I wanted out of
        FPCNS and into anther OPC fellowship. ... Why wasn’t I
        “taken under the care of Presbytery”? Was it not precisely,
        though the session, whose responsibility it was to notify the
        [OPC] Presbytery of members who wanted to remain in the
        OPC, knew I wanted them to take just such action, they never
        communicated this to the [OPC] Presbytery? Had they done
        so, I would now be an OPC man having nothing whatsoever to
        do with FPCNS ... So, before ever my [PCA] trial began, the
        session of FPCNS knew that I wanted to leave their fellowship,
        not the OPC. They could have worked with me to make that
        happen but put me on trial instead ...”

OPC and PCA Rules on Receiving a New Congregation

The arguments above should be sufficient to establish that the PCA Session
erred by believing they could retain jurisdiction over an OPC member, against
his expressed wishes, after the Session and congregation left the OPC. But
this Case also raises the general issue of how a person’s membership is moved
from one church to another when that church changes denominations.


  excerpts from emails he contends he sent to the Panel on August 24, 28, 31,
  September 7, and 10.


                                     712
                                 APPENDIX T



We presume the FPCNS Session (PCA) was familiar with OPC rules on
receiving congregations, because the Session membership remained the same
after the church came into the PCA. [ROC 216; 220-21]

      OPC Form of Government 29.B - Receiving Congregations
       2. In receiving an existing, local church not belonging to the
           Orthodox Presbyterian Church as a new and separate
           congregation (church) the procedure shall be as follows:
           ...
               b. The presbytery or a committee appointed by the
                  presbytery shall examine the applicants as to their
                  Christian faith and life and their knowledge of and
                  willingness to submit to the standards of the
                  Orthodox Presbyterian Church. (Emphasis added.)

Granted, the above did not apply when the OP church sought entry to the PCA.
But it would be unreasonable to assume an OPC member like Mr. Gordon was
aware of the difference between the OPC and PCA rules. The Record does not
indicate Mr. Gordon ever submitted himself for such an applicant examination
in the PCA or ever expressed a “willingness to submit to the standards” of the
PCA, which, given his membership in the OPC, would have been a reasonable
expectation on his part.
While the PCA BCO might not be as explicit as the OPC’s, the principle still
pertains. A person cannot be taken into another denomination against his will,
especially when he has repeatedly indicated his intent to remain in his current
denomination. Agreement with the following points is not necessary to
establish the FPCNS PCA Session’s lack of jurisdiction, but it demonstrates a
principle.

It seems reasonable to expect that when a church joins the PCA, either from
PCA mission church status or from another denomination, each joining
congregant would ordinarily sign the PCA’s BCO 5-9.g. organizing petition to
transfer his membership into the PCA along with fellow congregation
members. Ordinarily, he would also publicly affirm the covenant promise of
BCO 5-9.i.(3) at the organizing service. Absent that signing and public
affirming, it is reasonable to question if a member of the previous church
intends to be part of the church in the new denomination. Put another way, the
entire membership roll of an OP church does not automatically become the
membership roll of the PCA church at the organization service. Each member
must ordinarily make that choice individually and demonstrably. And this
seems to at least be implied in the PCA’s stipulations below from the BCO 5
                                     713
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



section titled “The Organization of a Particular Church.” (Emphasis added
throughout.)

        BCO 5.9.g. In order to proceed to organization as a particular
        church the members of the mission church shall sign a petition
        to Presbytery requesting the same.

        BCO 5.9.h. Upon Presbytery’s approval of the petition,
        Presbytery shall appoint an organizing commission and shall
        set the date and time of the organization service.

        BCO 5-9.i.(3). A member of the organizing commission shall
        require communicant members of the mission church present
        to enter into covenant, by answering the following question
        affirmatively, with uplifted hand: Do you, in reliance on God
        for strength, solemnly promise and covenant that you will walk
        together as a particular church, on the principles of the faith
        and order of the Presbyterian Church in America, and that you
        will be zealous and faithful in maintaining the purity and peace
        of the whole body?

The SJC Decision does not cite BCO 13-8, which would govern how
transferring ruling elders become PCA elders in a newly received PCA
church.

        BCO 13-8. The Presbytery, before receiving into its
        membership any church, shall designate a commission to meet
        with the church's ruling elders to make certain that the elders
        understand and can sincerely adopt the doctrines and polity of
        the Presbyterian Church in America as contained in its
        Constitution. In the presence of the commission, the ruling
        elders shall be required to answer affirmatively the questions
        required of officers at their ordination.

If BCO 13-8 is the only constitutional provision that applies to an OPC church
joining the PCA, it would contradict my understanding of the jurisdictional
question. But I don’t believe BCO 13-8 is the only paragraph that applies.
BCO Chapter 5 also applies regarding the congregation members. The
provisions in BCO 5 were adopted after BCO 13-8. So, it’s reasonable to



                                      714
                                      APPENDIX T



understand BCO 5-9 as describing an additional component of how a church
joins the PCA. 10

The Minutes of the Southern New England Commission to receive FPCNS
record the following from the organization service on April 28, 2017:

           The Service of Reception was conducted according to the
           Order of Service. The members of First Presbyterian Church
           responded in the affirmative to their vow to enter into covenant
           to walk together as a church according to the principles of faith
           and order of the Presbyterian Church in America. The church
           was received according to the Word of God and faith and order
           of the Presbyterian Church in America.” [ROC 222]

The Order of Service in the Record clearly followed that in BCO 5-9. [ROC
223-225]

To maintain that Mr. Gordon became a PCA member against his will and
against his expressed wishes might be akin to the following examples. Let’s
say 50 members of the 99-member XYZ PCA Church vote to leave the PCA
and each of the 50 sign a petition to join a local RCA church. But the other 49
vote against doing so and decline to sign the joining petition. Are those 49
automatically excised from the rolls of the PCA and immediately entered onto
the rolls of the RCA against their will, and immediately under the jurisdiction
of its mixed-gender Session and female minister?

Or let’s say instead of joining the RCA, the PCA church joined the CREC.
And let’s say John Doe was in the 49-person minority voting against leaving.
And let’s say that regardless of Mr. Doe’s clear intention not to leave the PCA,
the CREC Session believes it has automatic jurisdiction over him and promptly
indicts him for the sin of failing to have his children baptized (citing WCF

10
      Here’s some quick history. In 1977, Mid-Atlantic Presbytery filed Overture 33
     seeking to add BCO 13-8, which was enacted a year later by the 6 th GA. Six years
     later, BCO 5-1 through 5-7 were added and enacted by the 12th GA in 1984. In
     1985, BCO 5-9 was extensively revised. In 2011, BCO Chapter 5 was revised again,
     including the addition of what is now BCO 5-5. In 2015, BCO 5-2 was revised, and
     the last revision to BCO Chapter 5 came in 2017 with a revision to 5-3. Thus, it is
     difficult to argue that BCO 13-8 supersedes or stands in place of the lengthy
     procedures of BCO 5-9, when BCO 5-9 was revised seven years after BCO 13-8.
     The extensive section on “The Organization of a Particular Church” did not exist in
     1978 when BCO 13-8 was enacted.
                                           715
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



28:5). Mr. Doe then reiterates what he clearly stated previously that he never
intended to become part of the CREC. But they retain him on the rolls, conduct
the trial, and eventually excommunicate him for lack of repentance for that
sin. I find the jurisdictional understanding in these two examples untenable.

Finally, referencing those two examples, PCA presbyteries are often not
consulted in such church departures, so how would the average member who
wants to remain in the PCA know what his options are? PCA ministers and
elders might be aware, but it’s not reasonable to expect the average member to
know his options. And it might be many months before a PCA presbytery has
a stated meeting and can act on the member’s petition to remain in the PCA at
large.11

Proper Charges? - If the Case had been ruled administratively out of order,
there would be no need to address the Charges. However, because the SJC
took up the Case, some comments are warranted. Before addressing them
directly, we commend the Session for its desire to exhibit pastoral care and
offer its counsel. Marital difficulties are often quagmires. And this Dissent
does not express any opinion on the Session’s assessment of the difficulties in
the marriage.

The SJC Reasoning states: “At trial, in his brief, oral argument to Presbytery,
and in oral argument to the Panel in this case, the Appellant admitted that the
trial court’s charges against him were true.” However, it matters little whether
the charges were true if the charges don’t allege something that is truly a sin.
BCO 29-1 stipulates, “Nothing, therefore, ought to be considered by any court
as an offense, or admitted as a matter of accusation, which cannot be proved
to be such from Scripture.” These two charges were illegitimate at the outset.

Charge 1 - The first charge in the PCA Session’s indictment was “failing to
receive and heed the discipline of the [OPC] Session as stated in the
admonition of March 11, 2015.” The PCA Session cited Hebrews 13:17 as the
Scripture mandating obedience the admonition/ recommendation of the elders:
“Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they are keeping watch over your
souls, asl those who will have to give an account.” [ROC 39]

First, it seems odd for a PCA Session to charge someone with not heeding
recommendations of an OPC Session, even if the membership of those

11
     Twelve of our PCA presbyteries only meet twice a year, and 28 others only meet
     three times a year.

                                         716
                                       APPENDIX T



Sessions is identical. More importantly, it is an error to claim husbands and
wives are required to obey Session advice or recommendations regarding
marital struggles, and risk excommunication if they decline. It’s not
automatically a sin to “fail to heed” such counsel. Presumably, the obedience
in view in Hebrews 13 pertains to things Scripture prohibits or requires.
Session recommendations are not that. (WCF 20.2) Thus, it is not a violation
of membership vows.12

A Session might indict a man for the sin of divorce without biblical grounds,
but it cannot indict him for declining to follow Session recommendations,
advice, counsel, admonitions, etc. This principle was most recently expressed
in the SJC’s February 2020 Decision in Case 2019-06: PCA v. Presbytery of
the Mississippi Valley, which was a BCO 40-5 referral from the 47th GA
involving a wife [the Petitioner] who had been pursuing a divorce. Below are
the most pertinent excerpts.

           The 47th GA’s Question 2 to Presbytery - “If a church member
           declines to follow advice or counsel from a Session, is that
           automatically evidence of failing to submit to the government
           and discipline of the church? (i.e., offense for which the
           Session indicted her).”

           MS Valley Response - “No. Not automatically. The action of
           the session was to "rule" that [the Petitioner] did not have a
           Biblical basis for divorce (ROC 13 l. 15ff.). That "rule" was
           communicated to remove any ambiguity as to what the session
           deemed obedient action for both [the husband and wife].
           Knowing her expressed conclusions (ROC 12, l. 11) a clear
           scriptural decision and communication was approved by the
           session for [the Petitioner]. That was intended for her benefit.”

           [SJC Reasoning for finding that Response unsatisfactory] -
           Presbytery's answer concludes with the assertion below, which
           indicates that Presbytery, and perhaps the Session, believe the
           Petitioner only had two options: "obey" and stop the divorce,
           or file a Complaint.”

12
     OPC Directory for Worship 4.b.2.(5) Vow 5: Do you promise to ... to submit in the
     Lord to its government, and to heed its discipline, even in case you should be found
     delinquent in doctrine or life? PCA BCO 57-5. Vow 5: Do you submit yourselves
     to the government and discipline of the Church, and promise to study its purity and
     peace?
                                            717
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




               “The proper course of action for [the Petitioner], if her
               conscience would not allow her to obey, would have
               been to file a complaint against their ruling. The fifth
               vow of membership precludes summarily disregarding
               the session's communication. (BCO 57-5.5; ROC 12,
               l.11).”

           But there's at least one other option: to consider, but
           respectfully disagree with, the Session's conclusion. That
           would not be a violation of membership vow 5 or de facto
           evidence of "failing to submit to the government and discipline
           of the church." Granted, in a situation like that, a Session
           might allege the person is divorcing without biblical grounds,
           and indict on those grounds, but that was not the Indictment
           against the Petitioner.” ... (Emphasis added.)

           Furthermore, whenever a Session offers such or similar
           counsel, a member is not required to file a BCO 43 Complaint
           if the member declines to follow it (contra Presbytery's
           response to GA Question 2). A member's responsibility is to
           seriously and respectfully consider the counsel. But there may
           be many instances where a Session advises it regards
           something as sinful, without the member sinning by not
           following the advice. (The person's underlying action may
           indeed be sinful, but his response to the advice is not, in and of
           itself, sinful). This might include Session advice on how the
           Lord's Day should be observed, whether parents should use
           books with depictions of Jesus, whether parents should baptize
           their infants (WCF 28:5), whether tithing is morally obligated,
           the permissible use of tobacco or alcohol, appropriate clothing
           standards, "undue delay of marriage" (WLC 139), "avoiding
           unnecessary lawsuits" (WLC 141), what constitutes
           "prejudicing the good name of our neighbor" (WLC 145). And
           if a Session believed an indictment was warranted in any such
           situation, the indictment should allege the underlying sin, not
           the person's decision declining to follow Session counsel.” 13
           (Emphasis added.)

13
     SJC’s 2020 Report to the 48th GA, St. Louis Commissioner’s Handbook, pp. 2051-
     64. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1MW-TfB2VWJQa8-mZyq1Shr5l2zD9VTwo
     /view?usp=sharing
                                         718
                                       APPENDIX T




Charge 2 - The second charge was “intentionally absenting himself from
Lord’s Day worship at First Presbyterian ...” (Emphasis added.) The Session
cited Hebrews 10:24-25, “Let us consider how to stir up one another to love
and good works, not neglecting to meet together, as is the habit of some, ...”
And in this charge, the Session accused him of violating OPC membership
vow 5 and PCA membership vow 4.

As with Charge 1, it’s hard to understand how a PCA court can charge
someone with breaking an OPC membership vow. And as explained above,
Mr. Gordon never affirmed any PCA membership vow. Furthermore, the
January 2019 trial transcript records:

           Mr. Gordon ... indicated that he attended the church pastored
           by David Booth (Merrimack Valley Orthodox Presbyterian
           Church). He also reported that he attended a Presbyterian
           Church when he was [in] Shiloh and he has also attended
           Genesis, a church in Burlington,” [ROC 47]

It is not automatically a violation of Hebrews 10:25 to decline to heed a
Session’s counsel to attend worship at a specific church when that person is
regularly attending elsewhere, especially when the specific church has changed
denominations and the accused desired to remain in the original
denomination.14

Conclusion - For the reasons above, the Appeal should have been ruled
administratively out of order for lack of standing, and any actions of any PCA
court regrading Mr. Gordon should have been ruled null and void for lack of
jurisdiction. This dissenting opinion was written by RE Howie Donahoe and
joined by RE Steve Dowling and TE Michael Ross.




14
      None of the seven Larger Catechism questions on the 4 th Commandment cite
     Hebrews 10:25. It is cited in Westminster Confession of Faith 21:6 and 26:2, but not
     in a way that supports how it was applied in Charge 2.




                                            719
              MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                      CASE NO. 2020-14
                     TE AARON MYERS
                             V.
                   ILLIANA PRESBYTERY
                   DECISION ON APPEAL
                       October 21, 2021

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

03/12/20   At a meeting of the Session of Providence Presbyterian
            Church (PPC), Edwardsville, Illinois, following a history of
            difficulties in the marriage of Danielle Myers (Mrs. Myers)
            and TE Aaron Myers (TE Myers) spanning at least two years,
            TE Myers was asked to resign from his pastoral charge. He
            complied.

03/13/20   Six of the ruling elders of Providence Presbyterian Church
            wrote to the Stated Clerk of Illiana Presbytery bringing a
            recommendation of charges against TE Myers with respect
            to his treatment of Mrs. Myers.

03/15/20   A letter to the congregation from the Session was read by RE
            Rodgers informing them of TE Myers' resignation.

03/19/20   Mrs. Myers wrote to the Session complaining about alleged
           inaccuracies in the Session’s announcement to the
           congregation and asking that they publicly correct the matter
           with respect to the congregation.

           TE Myers rescinded his resignation.

03/22/20   The Session denied Mrs. Myers request of 3/19.

05/23/20   At a stated meeting, Illiana Presbytery appointed a commission
           to investigate reports concerning TE Myers according to BCO
           31-2.

05/25/20   Mrs. Myers wrote to the Investigative Commission to say that
           she would not meet or speak with them, and that she intended
           to exercise her rights under BCO 35-2.


                                720
                           APPENDIX T



06/03/20   Mrs. Myers wrote to the Investigative Commission saying, “I
           reverse my decision to follow BCO 35-2 to not testify against
           my husband. I also do not stand by the letters dated March 28,
           2020, May 22, 2020 or May 25, 2020 that were signed by me.
           All three were written under duress and with pressure and
           coercion from Aaron.”

06/26/20   TE Myers informed the Presbytery Investigative Commission
           that he would not meet with them (BCO 35-1) and why.

06/29/20   The Commission to Investigate decided that there was
           sufficient evidence to raise a strong presumption of guilt
           regarding the allegations brought by the six elders of
           Providence Presbyterian Church (PPC) and recommended
           Illiana Presbytery institute process.

07/16/20   TE Myers signed a severance agreement delivered by REs
           Lollar and Cope and then used profanity regarding Mrs.
           Myers, in the presence of neighbors and children. TE Myers
           asked the two elders for forgiveness that night via text.

07/21/20   A six-member Judicial Commission was appointed by Illiana
           Presbytery in response to Presbytery's Investigative
           Commission's report to Presbytery. TE Myers declared that he
           would not testify.
07/30/20   The Commission suspended TE Myers from the duties of his
           office pending the conclusion of the trial (BCO 31-10).

09/25/20   Following several weeks of disputes and decisions regarding
           the language of the indictment, the Commission issued an
           amended indictment of three charges: 1. maltreatment of his
           wife; 2. fits of anger; and 3. sexual immorality (use of
           pornography), and citation to appear for arraignment.

10/08/20   The Defense counsel entered a plea of not guilty as received
           in writing from the Defendant. A new trial date was set for
           10/24/20.

10/24/20   The Trial was held. In the trial proceedings, charge 3. sexual
           immorality (use of pornography) and related specifications,
           were dropped according to a ruling by the Moderator.
                                721
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



10/31/20       After Commission deliberation, the Defendant was
               unanimously found guilty of the charge of “maltreatment of
               his wife” and the charge of “fits of anger”.

11/05/20       The Commission considered and decided upon a censure to
               recommend to Presbytery, to wit, “indefinite suspension from
               office”.

11/21/20       Illiana Presbytery heard the report of the Commission
               decision that TE Aaron Myers was guilty of the charge of
               maltreatment of his wife and the charge of having fits of anger
               and unanimously adopted the Commission’s recommended
               censure as amended to include suspension from the
               Sacraments (BCO 36-5).

12/02/20       TE Myers filed his Appeal with the SJC (received 01/06/21).

02/27/21       Appellant submitted alleged new evidence to the Panel that he
               contended had an important bearing on the case (BCO 35-14).
               In light of the alleged new evidence, Appellant requested the
               SJC to set aside the judgment and censure in the case and
               remand the case to Illiana Presbytery for a new trial (BCO 42-9).

04/29/21       Without objection, the Panel found that the statement of Mrs.
               Danielle Myers submitted by Appellant as new evidence was
               not new evidence that had an important bearing on the case,
               and thus declined to receive it.

08/10/21       The Panel (Chairman RE Steve Dowling, TE David Coffin,
               RE John Pickering, and Alternates TE Charles McGowan and
               RE John White) conducted the hearing.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE

   At its meeting on November 21, 2020, did Illiana Presbytery err in
   approving its Judicial Commission’s decision that TE Aaron Myers was
   guilty of the charge of maltreatment of his wife and the charge of having
   fits of anger?




                                     722
                                       APPENDIX T



III. JUDGMENT

       No. The decision of Illiana Presbytery is upheld in whole. None of the
       Appellant’s Specifications of Error are sustained.

IV. REASONING

       With respect to the guilty verdict Appellant raises four specifications of
       error on the part of Illiana Presbytery (IP). In a first specification of error,15
       Appellant alleges that IP erred in allowing witnesses to the charges who
       were not eyewitnesses to the offenses alleged. In addition to the testimony
       of Appellant’s wife, the Judicial Commission (JC) allowed certain Ruling
       Elders of the congregation to testify that Appellant himself had confessed
       to the truth of the allegations. Appellant argued that such testimony was
       “hearsay” and, as such, prohibited as evidence.

       This specification of error is not sustained.

       A Minute Explanatory. The Book of Church Order (BCO) sets forth
       standards for both the competence and the credibility of witnesses. As to
       competence:

           All persons of proper age and intelligence are competent
           witnesses, except such as do not believe in the existence of
           God, or a future state of rewards and punishments. . . . Either
           party has the right to challenge a witness whom he believes to
           be incompetent, and the court shall examine and decide upon
           his competency. . . . (BCO 35-1)

       The Record shows that the JC acted in accordance with this provision in
       admitting witnesses and in responding to challenges. The BCO does not
       require that witnesses be eyewitness. Further, the BCO does not forbid
       “hearsay” evidence.

       As to credibility:


15
     The indefinite article is used throughout with respect to specifications because the
     rather diffuse and repetitive character of the Appeal made it difficult to succinctly
     identify specifications of error. It is the Court’s opinion that the following does
     justice to the Appellant’s submission. Future appellants are herein encouraged to
     consult with BCO Appendix G, Suggested Forms for Judicial Business, V. Appeal.
                                            723
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           It belongs to the court to judge the degree of credibility to be
           attached to all evidence. (BCO 35-1)

       The Record shows that the JC judged as credible the testimony of Ruling
       Elders testifying that Appellant himself had confessed to the offenses
       alleged. Here it is instructive to note that in courts that do have a rule on
       the inadmissibility of hearsay statements, a well-established exception to
       the rule is made in the case of testimony with respect to statements made
       against penal interest, i.e., a statement made by a defendant is admissible
       as evidence if it is inculpatory.16 The credibility of such testimony is found
       in the commonsense belief that people do not rashly or falsely make
       statements against penal interest. The JC found the testimony credible.
       Apart from a showing of “clear error,” the SJC must defer to the judgment
       of the lower court in this matter (BCO 39-3.3). No such showing is set
       forth in the Record.

       A second specification alleges that IP erred in allowing only one witness
       to establish a charge, contrary to BCO 35-3, “The testimony of more than
       one witness shall be necessary in order to establish any charge; yet if, in
       addition to the testimony of one witness, corroborative evidence be
       produced, the offense may be considered to be proved.”

       This specification of error is not sustained.

       A Minute Explanatory. This specification depends upon the cogency of
       the first, and as the first has not been sustained, the second fails with it.
       According to our reading of the Record each charge was established by at
       least two witnesses.

       A third specification of error alleges that IP erred in allowing charge 2,
       “fits of anger”, which charge violated the provisions of BCO 32-20, i.e.,
       “Process, in case of scandal, shall commence within the space of one year
       after the offense was committed, unless it has recently become
       flagrant. . . .” Appellant contends that charges were received by the court
       of original jurisdiction over a year after the alleged offense took place.

       This specification of error is not sustained.


16
     Notice, on the other hand, statements that are exculpatory are typically excluded,
     unless corroborating circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the
     statement.
                                           724
                                     APPENDIX T



       A Minute Explanatory. The facts, in this specification, are not in dispute;
       rather the question has to do with the meaning of BCO 32-20. In his
       concurring opinion to SJC 2019-08, RE J. Howard Donahoe provided an
       able exposition of the BCO provision at issue. He argued that according to
       the text “the date of an alleged offense is not material unless the offense is
       a ‘case of scandal.’” RE Donahoe thus asks, “what constitutes a case of
       scandal?” For an answer he turned to an historic and highly regarded
       exposition of the BCO by F.P Ramsay:

           The principle is that, if the Church neglects to commence
           process against scandal (which is any flagrant public offence
           or practice bringing disgrace on the Church) within a year, she
           is debarred from thereafter doing it. This is not to shield the
           offender, but to incite to the prompt prosecution of such
           offences. Offences not so serious or scandalous the Church
           may bear with the longer while seeking to prevent scandal; but
           for no consideration is the Church to tolerate such offences as
           are scandalous.17

       RE Donahoe soundly concluded that the first sentence of BCO 32-20 does
       not shelter an offender in any way, but rather, it is simply meant to “spur
       the court to prosecute a particular offense—something that is actually
       bringing public disgrace on the Church. . . . For an offense to be a ‘case of
       scandal’ it would need to be an offense that is known to the broader public
       and, unless adjudicated promptly, would bring public disgrace on the
       Church. . . .”
       According to the ROC, the alleged offense brought before the JC of IP was
       not a “public offence or practice bringing disgrace on the Church,” a
       “scandal” “known to the broader public.” Therefore the one-year
       requirement of BCO 32-20 did not, in this case, prohibit IP from hearing
       and adjudicating the case.

       Finally, a fourth specification of error alleges that IP erred in employing
       judicial process with respect to the allegations concerning TE Myers, to
       the neglect of pastoral care and marriage counseling.

       This specification of error is not sustained.


17
     F.P. Ramsay, An Exposition of the Form of Government and the Rules of Discipline
     of the Presbyterian Church in the United States (Richmond: The Presbyterian
     Committee of Publication, 1898), p. 207.

                                          725
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    A Minute Explanatory. Apart from a showing of “clear error,” the SJC
    must defer to the judgment of the lower court regarding those matters of
    discretion and judgment which can only be addressed by a court with
    familiar acquaintance of the events and parties (BCO 39-3.3). No such
    showing is contained in the Record.

    However, the Record does show that judicial process took place only after
    reasonable attempts at pastoral care had been made at both the local and
    presbytery level. Early on members of the Session had urged the Appellant
    to pursue marital counseling. Pastoral help was sought by Session
    members from a respected mentor. Counseling was arranged through
    another minister of the Presbytery, apparently to no avail. The Record
    shows that IP took up judicial process, not to resolve a pastoral matter, but
    because, after investigation, IP concluded that there was a strong
    presumption of guilt that the Appellant had committed grievous offenses
    against his wife that required disciplinary action.

The Panel Decision was drafted by TE David Coffin and RE John Pickering
and amended and unanimously approved by the Panel. The SJC amended and
approved the decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur         M. Duncan Concur              Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur            S. Duncan Concur              Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Concur                  Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur         Greco Concur                  Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur         Kooistra Concur               Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur          Lee Concur                    Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur         Lucas Absent                  White Absent
      Dowling Concur         McGowan Concur                Wilson Concur
      (22-0-0)


                        CASE NO. 2021-01
                    MR. STUART MICHELSON
                               V.
                NORTHWEST GEORGIA PRESBYTERY
                    DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                         October 21, 2021

The SJC finds the case is administratively out of order as prematurely filed.
Presbytery had not completed its hearing on the Complaint as of the date the

                                      726
                                  APPENDIX T



Complaint was filed with the SJC. The Complainant’s time to elevate the
Complaint is reset so that timing begins on the later to occur of the notification
of: (a) this action by the SJC or (b) ruling by Presbytery on the Complaint.

The SJC approved the foregoing decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur          M. Duncan Concur              Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur             S. Duncan Concur              Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur          Ellis Concur                  Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur          Greco Concur                  Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur          Kooistra Concur               Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur           Lee Concur                    Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur          Lucas Absent                  White Absent
      Dowling Concur          McGowan Concur                Wilson Concur
      (22-0-0)


                         CASE NO. 2021-02
                       RE LINDSEY TIPPINS
                                V.
                NORTHWEST GEORGIA PRESBYTERY
                  DECISION ON BCO 40-5 REQUEST
                          October 21, 2021

The SJC advises the Stated Clerk that the matter should be referred to the
General Assembly’s Review of Presbytery Records Committee.

The SJC approved the foregoing decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur          M. Duncan Concur              Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur             S. Duncan Concur              Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur          Ellis Concur                  Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur          Greco Concur                  Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur          Kooistra Concur               Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur           Lee Dissent                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Dissent         Lucas Absent                  White Absent
      Dowling Concur          McGowan Concur                Wilson Dissent
      (19-3-0)




                                       727
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                         CASE NO. 2020-10
                         MR. ERIC EAGLE
                                V.
                   SAVANNAH RIVER PRESBYTERY
                     DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                          October 21, 2021

          The SJC finds the case is administratively out of order as prematurely
filed. Presbytery had not completed its hearing on the Complaint as of the date
the Complaint was filed with the SJC. The Complainant’s time to elevate the
Complaint is reset so that timing begins on the later to occur of the notification
of: (a) this action by the SJC or (b) ruling by Presbytery on the Complaint.

        The SJC apparoved the decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur          M. Duncan Concur              Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur             S. Duncan Concur              Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur          Ellis Concur                  Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur          Greco Concur                  Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur          Kooistra Concur               Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur           Lee Concur                    Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur          Lucas Absent                  White Absent
      Dowling Concur          McGowan Concur                Wilson Concur
      (22-0-0)


                       CASE NO. 2021-05
            TE DUSTYN EUDALY AND TE STEVEN LIGHT
                              V.
               SOUTHWEST FLORIDA PRESBYTERY
                   DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                        October 21, 2021

The SJC finds this matter to be administratively out of order. PCA jurisdiction
over Complainants ended on February 9, 2020, when they affiliated with
another branch of the visible church (see BCO 38-3). Therefore, they lacked
standing to file this Complaint.




                                       728
                                APPENDIX T



      Bankson Concur        M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur           S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur        Ellis Concur                 Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur        Greco Concur                 Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur        Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur         Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur        Lucas Absent                 White Absent
      Dowling Concur        McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (22-0-0)


                      CASE NO. 2021-08
         IN RE KOREAN SOUTHWEST ORANGE COUNTY
              CITATION BY GENERAL ASSEMBLY
                       October 21, 2021

         The SJC cites Korean Southwest Orange County Presbytery to appear
at the March 3, 2022 Stated Meeting of the SJC in Case No. 2021-08, unless
the Presbytery provides satisfactory responses in writing by January 14, 2022
to part (d) of the RPR Report presented to the 2021 General Assembly in the
review of Presbytery’s records.

The SJC approved the decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur        M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur           S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur        Ellis Concur                 Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur        Greco Concur                 Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur        Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur         Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur        Lucas Absent                 White Absent
      Dowling Concur        McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (22-0-0)




                                     729
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                        CASE NO. 2020-12
                  COMPLAINT OF TE RYAN SPECK
                               v.
                     MISSOURI PRESBYTERY
                    DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                         October 21, 2021

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

In July 2018, Memorial Presbyterian Church (PCA) in St. Louis hosted the
first Revoice Conference. Thereafter, several individuals, sessions, and
presbyteries communicated concerns to Memorial and to Missouri
Presbytery. In light of these concerns, in October 2018, the pastor of Memorial
PCA, TE Greg Johnson, and the Session of Memorial PCA each requested
investigations (BCO 31-2 and 41-1) of the allegations. Presbytery directed
different committees to investigate the concerns and allegations, and it heard
reports from these committees during several Presbytery meetings over many
months. In July 2020, Presbytery heard and considered a 97-page report from
its committee conducting a BCO 31-2 investigation of allegations against TE
Johnson. The committee recommended Presbytery decline to find a strong
presumption of guilt on each of four allegations, and Presbytery adopted those
committee recommendations. TE Ryan Speck filed a Complaint against those
decisions, and it was considered by a Presbytery judicial commission. In his
Complaint, TE Speck contended:

        [The Presbytery] Committee erred in its BCO 31-2
        investigation of TE Greg Johnson by failing to act “with due
        diligence and great discretion [to] demand from [TE Johnson]
        satisfactory explanations concerning reports affecting [his]
        Christian character” (BCO 31-2). Namely, that TE Johnson
        did not adequately answer some questions posed to him, and
        what he did answer provides sufficient evidence to raise a
        strong presumption of guilt that his views are not in conformity
        with the Scriptures and the Westminster Standards and,
        therefore, warrant institution of judicial process.

In October 2020, Presbytery adopted the recommended judgment of the
commission and denied the Complaint, which TE Speck then carried to the
SJC. The Hearing was conducted before the full SJC at its Stated Meeting in
Atlanta on March 25, 2021.


                                     730
                                APPENDIX T



After the Hearing, a question arose as to whether the Record of the Case was
complete. The SJC appointed a committee of six members to return a
recommendation on the question. A month later, the SJC adopted four
committee recommendations, which included rescinding the previous ruling
that the Record was complete and sending a letter to Presbytery’s
Representative with 25 questions for TE Johnson. TE Johnson responded to
each, and both parties then filed five-page Addendum Briefs addressing those
responses.

The SJC chairman reconvened an SJC meeting on July 13, 2021, and randomly
drew names for a drafting committee. The committee filed its report on
September 21, 2021. On October 21, 2021, the SJC voted to deny the
Complaint, as shown in the Decision below.

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

1994        Missouri Presbytery (hereafter “Missouri”) produced a report
            titled “Faithfulness to God’s Standards: The Lord’s Calling to
            Homosexually-Inclined Christians” which was an update to a
            1980 RPCES Report titled: “Pastoral Care for the Repentant
            Homosexual.”

2017        Missouri produced an extensive revision and expansion of the
            1994 report, and titled it, “Homosexuality and the Gospel of
            Grace: Faithfulness to the Lord’s Calling in an Age of Sexual
            Autonomy.” The Report was 240 pages, with an additional 260
            pages of appendixes, and was posted on Missouri’s website:
            https://drive.google.com/file/d/1iBLGL_2YhsIcI9_kZCBxLZHS
            YXWhFeLQ/view
05/28/18    TE Johnson published "Reply to ‘Queer Culture in the PCA?’" on
            the Aquila Report defending the upcoming Revoice conference (in
            response to a post by TE Al Baker, "Queer Culture in the PCA?"
            published three days prior).

07/15/18    CrossPolitic Podcast conducted a 1-hour interview of TE
            Johnson.

07/26/18 Memorial Presbyterian Church (hereafter “Memorial”) hosted the
          three-day Revoice 2018 conference. TE Johnson taught one
          breakout session, the transcript of which was in the Record of this
          Case.
                                    731
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



09/07/18   Session of Covenant PCA, Harrisonburg, VA sent a seven-page
           letter to the Memorial Session regarding Memorial’s and TE
           Johnson’s involvement in Revoice 2018.

09/27/18   TE Andrew Dionne sent a letter to the Memorial Session, which
           was co-signed by 20 other PCA TEs. Among other things, the
           letter exhorted Memorial Session “to repent of [their] sin of
           promoting and hosting the 2018 Revoice Conference.”

10/10/18   TE Johnson and Session of Memorial sent a letter to Missouri
           requesting a BCO 31-2 investigation regarding allegations against
           TE Johnson and requesting Presbytery to accept, as a BCO 41
           Reference, the Session’s request for Missouri to also investigate it
           with regard to the allegations pertaining to hosting Revoice 2018.

10/16/18   At a Stated Meeting, Missouri created an ad hoc Committee to
           Investigate Memorial (“CIM”) and tasked it with “investigating
           TE Greg Johnson ... as well as the Memorial Session, according
           to the provisions of BCO 31.2 and BCO 41.1-4, after concerns
           were expressed against it for allowing Revoice 18, an organization
           outside of the jurisdiction of Memorial and outside of the PCA, to
           hold a conference at its church in July 2018.” Members included
           TEs Ron Lutjens (Chair), Bruce Clark, Sean Maney, Ryan Speck,
           and Mike Williams, & REs Kyle Keating, George Poland, and
           Frank Theus.

10/25/18   Calvary Presbytery sent a 9-page letter to Missouri.

11/13/18   Southwest Florida Presbytery sent a 12-page letter to Missouri.

01/15/19   At a Stated Meeting, Missouri heard the CIM report on its
           progress. Missouri referred all letters pertaining to Revoice to the
           CIM (including the letters already sent from Calvary Presbytery
           and Southwest Florida Presbytery).

01/26/19   Savannah River Presbytery sent a one-page letter to Missouri
           supporting the October 2018 letter from Calvary Presbytery.

05/18/19   At a Called Meeting, Missouri considered the 115-page CIM
           report, which had been previously distributed by email. Missouri
           voted to approve the concluding statements and nine judgments.
                                     732
                                APPENDIX T



           Excerpt from Minutes: “TE Johnson shared his testimony to
           provide some context for his decision to host Revoice. He noted
           he wanted to share before the testimony with the Fathers and
           Brothers before it is published in Christianity Today on Monday.”

07/08/19   TE Ryan Speck filed a Complaint with Presbytery regarding
           CIM’s nine judgments approved at the May 18 meeting.

07/11/19   TE Johnson and Memorial Session sent a two-page letter to
           Presbytery responding to the May 2019 CIM Report.

07/16/19   At a Missouri Stated Meeting, TE Johnson provided a report from
           Memorial’s Session to the Presbytery. A committee was
           appointed to respond to Memorial’s response (“CRM”).

08/10/19   Westminster Presbytery sent a 4-page letter to Missouri.

08/--/19   SE Alabama (SEAL) Presbytery sent 5-page letter with
           allegations to Missouri. Later, an “Unofficial” 21-page
           Addendum from SEAL was sent to Missouri.

09/12/19   TE Speck met with Missouri’s Complaint Response Committee
           (“CRM”) for the hearing on his July 2019 complaint.

10/15/19   At its Stated Meeting, Missouri partially sustained TE Speck’s
           July 2019 (Speck 1) complaint and voted to reconsider its
           affirmation of the nine judgments in the CIM report at a future
           called meeting.

           At the same meeting, several requests for investigation of TE
           Johnson were referred to the already existing CRM (formed three
           months earlier). CRM was instructed to begin a BCO 31-2
           investigation of TE Johnson.

           Presbytery also created an ad hoc study committee to create a short
           statement of affirmations and denials regarding human sexuality
           (hereafter, “A&D Committee.”)

11/25/19   Session of Covenant PCA, Fayetteville, AR sent a 5-page letter
           to Missouri.


                                    733
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



12/07/19   At a Called Meeting, Missouri reconsidered the nine theological
           judgments from the May 2019 CIM Report, and adopted amended
           statements to eight of them, referring one question to an ad hoc
           committee to reconsider the question of “Queer Treasure.” The
           newly-amended-and-adopted statements included both affirmation
           and criticism of parts of Revoice. Missouri authorized its Admin
           Committee to draft a letter communicating these changes.

12/22/19   Session of Grace & Peace PCA, Anna TX sent a 3-page letter to
           Missouri.

01/11/20   Central Georgia Presbytery adopted Overture 2 and “requests the
           48th General Assembly assume original jurisdiction of the case of
           the investigation by Missouri Presbytery of Greg Johnson and the
           session of Memorial Presbyterian Church with regard to
           theological error and involvement in the 2018 Revoice
           Conference.”

01/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, Missouri approved modifications to the
           reporting of actions taken on the CIM report—modifications that
           reflected Missouri’s actions taken at its October 15, 2019, Stated
           Meeting and its December 7, 2019, called meeting. The
           Presbytery also authorized the Administrative Committee to issue
           an open letter related to these actions, which was eventually titled
           “An Open Letter from the Administrative Committee to the
           Churches of the PCA and the broader Christian Church.” The
           letter and the updated CIM report were, and are, posted online at
           https://drive.google.com/file/d/1XyxAwY-ACZsVS-pe_barvg2
           _wI9BBJsB/view

           Below is an excerpt from the Open Letter.

               Here is a summary of our actions over the past two
               years .... In late 2018 we convened a committee to
               examine and respond to Revoice and Memorial
               Presbyterian Church's involvement in the conference.
               That committee presented its findings at a called
               meeting of Presbytery in May of 2019. At that meeting
               we approved nine theological judgments and one
               judicial judgment regarding Pastor Greg Johnson and
               Memorial Church. As part of that action, Memorial
                                     734
                               APPENDIX T



              and Pastor Johnson were required to respond to the
              report and a new committee was convened to work
              with them on our findings and judgments. That
              committee work is ongoing. Additionally, we received
              requests from two presbyteries and two local church
              sessions of the PCA to investigate Greg Johnson in
              particular. Those requests were referred to the existing
              committee and that work is ongoing. When the work
              of that committee is completed, they will recommend
              to the Presbytery whether there is a strong presumption
              of guilt of Memorial and Pastor Johnson. If there is a
              strong presumption of guilt for either party, we will
              proceed to a trial.

           Missouri also considered a draft of the Report of the A&D
           Committee and heard the Report of the CRM. Missouri’s
           Moderator informed Presbytery about Overture 2 from Central
           Georgia.

01/25/20   Savannah River Presbytery adopted Overture 4 concurring with
           Calvary’s Overture 2 and requested the same assumption of
           original jurisdiction “with regard to theological error and
           involvement in the 2018 Revoice Conference.”

02/01/20   Platte Valley Presbytery sent a one-page letter to Missouri
           regarding Missouri’s 2017 report, “Homosexuality and the Gospel
           of Grace” and what might be Missouri’s understanding of WCF
           6.5 regarding sin.

04/20/20   Missouri’s Stated Meeting was cancelled due to Covid.

05/2020    The GA’s Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality published
           its 60-page report. Members included TEs Bryan Chapell, Kevin
           DeYoung, Tim Keller and Jim Weidenaar & REs Derek
           Halvorson, Kyle Keating, and Jim Pocta.
           https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-
           48th-GA-5-28-20-1.pdf

06/02/20   At a Called Meeting, Presbytery adopted the 49 Affirmations and
           Denials proposed in its A&D Committee Report. A&D Members
           included TEs Dan Doriani, Mark Dalbey, and Ryan Laughlin &
                                   735
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           RE Sean Maney. The 8-page Report was posted at:
           https://drive.google.com/file/d/197ZR63Fg_TCwOswHjjz7Il2Ja
           F1O7mjI/view
           The 49 A&Ds were in two Parts:

           1. Concise Biblical Theology of Sexuality with Reference to
              Homosexuality
           2. Homosexuality and Identity in Current Debate

07/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, Presbytery heard the 97-page Report of the
           CRM (investigating allegations against TE Johnson) and adopted
           its 8 recommendations. It was posted: https://drive.google.com
           /file/d/18_vvpZg2PwRFwBjwAg4fGp-bhJXh8Mhm/view

           The CRM reported the following had been its understanding of
           its task.

              The first part of the work Presbytery assigned to us in
              the summer of 2019 was to meet with the Memorial
              Presbyterian Church (MPC) Session to clarify the
              commendations, recommendations, and requirements
              which Missouri Presbytery had addressed to Memorial
              after it (MOP) adopted the same at its called meeting
              on May 18, 2019. This part of our work was completed
              in the delivering of our report ... at the stated meeting
              on January 21, 2020.

              The second part of the work assigned to us by
              Presbytery in the fall of 2019 was to conduct an
              investigation after receiving requests from several
              church courts outside our Presbytery to do a BCO 31-
              2 investigation of TE Greg Johnson and his teaching.
              Eventually four letters requesting this were received
              by Missouri Presbytery (MOP). They came from
              Southeast Alabama Presbytery, Westminster Presbytery,
              and the Sessions of Covenant Church in Fayetteville,
              Arkansas and Grace & Peace Presbyterian Church in
              Anna, Texas. Those letters can be found in the
              Appendix at the end.



                                    736
                    APPENDIX T



The CRM recommended Presbytery adopt the following:

   While TE Greg Johnson has, at times, neglected to do
   all he could to clarify the meaning of his views and
   teaching, nevertheless, we the Missouri Presbytery of
   the Presbyterian Church in America, judge each of
   these allegations made against him to be untrue ... and
   find no warrant for a trial since we find no strong
   presumption of guilt [on any of the four allegations].

   Allegation 1: Denies that same-sex-attraction is sinful
   and thereby fails to properly distinguish misery from
   the sin which give rise to it. (Presbytery voted 44-1-4
   to find no strong presumption of guilt for this
   Allegation.)

    Allegation 2: Compromises and dishonors his identity
   in Christ by self-identifying as a same-sex-attracted
   man. (43-1-6)

   Allegation 3: Denies God's purpose and power to
   sanctify SSA believers by minimizing the pursuit of
   orientation change from homosexual to heterosexual.
   (41-2-8)

   Allegation 4: Cannot meet the biblical “above
   reproach” qualification for the eldership since (a)
   homosexual inclinations are sin proper and are more
   heinous for being “against nature,” and since (b) TE
   Johnson identifies as a homosexually inclined man.
   (41-6-4)

The other CRM recommendations adopted by Presbytery were as
follows:

   MSP - We are grateful for TE Greg Johnson’s
   acknowledgment that has not always been as careful
   in expressing himself in his teaching as he should have
   been. We hereby encourage and exhort Greg, our
   brother in Christ, to take great care, going forward, to
   qualify what ought to be qualified, and to clarify all his
                         737
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



               views when he speaks or writes, especially on the
               matter of sexuality; and when it is called for, to explain
               what he is not saying as well as what he is, especially
               with those who have taken offense with things he has
               said, or are likely to.

               MSP - We hereby commend TE Johnson for his
               commitment to the authority of God’s Word in his life
               and teaching for his faithful ministry to the flock of
               God at Memorial Presbyterian Church, and for his zeal
               to see unbelievers savingly encounter Jesus Christ’s
               love through the ministry of the Church, especially
               people in secular LGBT communities.

               MSP - We hereby declare that TE Johnson has been
               and remains an honorable member in good standing of
               Missouri Presbytery.

               MSP - We receive Parts 1 and 2, which are the
               summaries of the allegations and the arguments behind
               the committee’s judgments, as useful for Session study
               and for the perfecting of the Church’s understanding
               of the Scriptural teaching on sexuality and how it can
               be rightly applied in our 21st century setting.

           Presbytery also heard the report of the Committee to Reconsider
           Queer Treasure (the one theological judgment of the CIM not
           approved on December 7, 2019), voting to find fault with this
           lecture given at Revoice 18.

09/17/20   Presbytery received a different complaint from TE Speck regarding
           Presbytery’s adoption of the CRM’s finding no strong presumption
           of guilt on any of the four allegations.

10/20/20   At a Stated Meeting, Presbytery created a BCO 15-3 judicial
           commission to consider TE Speck’s September 17 Complaint, and
           to propose a judgment.

11/10/20   The Complaint Review Commission met and adopted a decision
           denying TE Speck’s September 17 Complaint, with supporting
           rationale.
                                     738
                               APPENDIX T



11/16/20   At a Called Meeting, Presbytery approved the Complaint
           Commission’s proposed denial of TE Speck’s September 17, 2020
           Complaint. The vote was 43-6-1.

12/02/20   TE Speck carried his September 17, 2020 Complaint to the
           General Assembly (Case 2020-12).

01/18/21   SJC Officers declared the Complaint administratively in order
           (OMSJC 9.1.a), ruled the Complaint should be heard by the full
           SJC instead of a Panel (OMSJC 9.3), and ruled the Record of the
           Case was complete and the Complaint was judicially in order and
           ready for Briefs and a Hearing (OMSJC 9.1.b).

03/09/21   Complainant filed his 10-page Preliminary Brief.

03/12/21   SJC met by teleconference. SJC deleted 430 pages from the
           Record, as shown below in an excerpt from those Minutes:

               2020-12 Speck v. Missouri Presbytery. The SJC
               discussed the contents of the Record of the Case
               (ROC). The following motion was made, seconded,
               properly amended and adopted without objection: That
               the Commission delete from the ROC in Case No.
               2020-12 the paper entitled “Homosexuality and the
               Gospel of Grace: Faithfulness to the Lord’s Calling in
               an Age of Sexual Autonomy” (ROC 46-445) as a
               paper not having a “bearing on the complaint” (BCO
               43-6) and being “extraneous to the matter before the
               Commission” (OMSJC 7.4.b) and the Standing Rules
               of Missouri Presbytery (ROC 16-45). The SJC takes
               judicial notice of the Report and Standing Rules;
               therefore, the Parties and SJC members may reference
               them in argument, but SJC members are not required
               to read those documents to qualify for the Case.
               In response to inquiries from SJC members, the
               Chairman ruled that SJC members from presbyteries
               submitting BCO 34-1 Overtures were not disqualified
               from Case No. 2020-12 or Case No. 2020-05 by virtue
               of their presbyteries’ Overtures.

03/15/21   Respondent filed his 10-page Preliminary Brief.
                                   739
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



03/25/21   Hearing was conducted before full SJC in Atlanta with all 24
           judges present. (TEs Coffin and Lucas joined by teleconference.)
           Complainant Speck, his assistant, TE Dominic Aquila, and
           Presbytery’s Representative, TE Tim LeCroy, were present.
           Presbytery’s Clerk observed online.

           After the Hearing, the SJC moved into the Committee of the
           Whole and later rose from the Committee of the Whole. Below is
           an excerpt from the Minutes:

              Chair reported that the committee of the whole
              approved a motion to recommend that the Commission
              rescind the declaration that the case is judicially in
              order, for the limited purpose of perfecting the record
              with answers to written questions propounded by
              members of the Commission. OMSJC 7.4(f). The
              Parliamentarian advised that this motion and process
              were in order. The committee of the whole approved
              a motion to recommend the statement of the judgment
              consisting of ROC page 3, lines 8-28, reformatted in
              the proper form for a statement of the issue. The
              Commission further agreed without objection to
              postpone consideration of the final report of the
              committee of the whole until the Commission next
              meets at the call of the Chair. The Chairman appointed
              the following committee to collect and collate
              questions from members of the Commission and to
              draft parameters to be communicated to Presbytery to
              perfect the Record of the Case ...

04/13/21   The six-man SJC Questions Committee filed its 30-page
           Report. In the course of the Committee preparing its Report, SJC
           members submitted a total of 103 questions, from which the
           Committee recommended selecting 25.
04/30/21   Reconvened SJC Meeting. SJC adopted recommendations from
           the Questions Committee in the following areas.

           The SJC rescinded the Officers’ previous OMSJC 11.1.e ruling
           that the Record in Case 2020-12 is “complete and sufficiently
           documented,” thereby suspending the Officers’ [January 2021]
           ruling that the Case is “judicially in order.”
                                   740
                     APPENDIX T



The SJC agreed to send a letter to Presbytery’s Respondent,
adopting the procedure outlined therein for responses to questions
and supplemental [addendum] briefs, per the authority of OMSJC
7.4.b and 7.4.e.(3) below.

    OMSJC 7.4.b -The hearing body may delete any
    portions of the Record as submitted that violate justice
    or due process, a provision of the BCO or Roberts
    Rules of Order, or that are extraneous to the matter
    before the Commission. The hearing body may also
    require the addition of material to the Record that is
    relevant to the Case. Deletions and additions shall
    always be recorded in the minutes of the hearing body,
    with the approved rationale for the change. Any
    deletions or additions shall be reported to the parties
    and may be addressed in argument from the parties in
    any hearing requested by a party on the ROC.

    OMSJC 7.3.e.(3). After oral argument [on a ROC
    dispute] the parties shall be dismissed and the Panel
    or Commission shall make a decision as to whether in
    fairness and justice the Record of the Case should be
    corrected.

The SJC adopted the Committee’s list of [25] questions for TE
Johnson, as amended, to be sent to Presbytery’s Representative.

Below is the text of the letter sent to Presbytery’s Representative,
which was also sent to the Complainant.

    In the SJC’s deliberations on Case 2020-12, the SJC
    decided the Record does not yet appear to be
    “complete and sufficiently documented” (OMSJC
    11.1.e) and that fairness and justice dictate the accused
    should have a chance to provide additional
    documentation for the Record (per the principle of
    OMSJC 7.4.e.(3)) Therefore, the SJC rescinded the
    SJC Officers’ previous ruling that the Record was
    complete and sufficiently documented, thereby also
    suspending the ruling that the Case was judicially in


                          741
   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



order at present. Here is the procedure we will now
follow.
     We are sending the attached questions to you as
Presbytery’s Representative with a request that you
invite TE Johnson to consider providing written
answers, which would be added to the Record per
OMSJC 7.4.b: “The hearing body may also require the
addition of material to the Record that is relevant to
the Case.” We have copied the Complainant on this
letter.
     We understand that you, as Presbytery’s
Representative, are empowered to represent
Presbytery in the perfection of the Record. Note that
Question #15 in the “Additional/General” category
calls for a response from Presbytery’s Representative. It
is also included in the list for TE Johnson, in case he
needs to assist you with the answer.
     If TE Johnson chooses to answer the attached
questions, please send his response document to the
SJC within 14 days after his confirmed receipt of the
Questions. Please use the email addresses below. If
TE Johnson is able to respond before the deadline, we
would welcome it. If TE Johnson declines, please
notify us promptly.
     If a Response Document is provided, it would be
added to the Record, but there would not be a need to
re-brief or have another Hearing. However, if either
you or the Complainant wish to file an addendum to
your previous Brief, dealing only with any additional
information provided by TE Johnson, the
Complainant’s filing deadline would be seven (7) days
after his receipt of the Response Document from the
SJC, and the Respondent’s would be ten (10) days
after his receipt of the Response Document from the
SJC. Any such additional Briefs are limited to five-
pages.
     If there is no Response Document to add to the
Record, the SJC Chairman would reconvene a SJC
meeting and the SJC would plan to continue with post-
hearing adjudication of the Complaint.


                      742
                                APPENDIX T



                    The SJC does not believe another hearing is
               required, even if TE Johnson responds to the
               questions. However, the SJC would schedule another
               Hearing, on the additional material only, if requested
               by one of the parties within 7 days after his receipt of
               the last additional Brief filed.

           The introduction to the SJC’s 25 Questions read as follows:

                 The SJC believes it is necessary to attempt to clarify
                 the Record of the Case because its magnitude (over
                 600 pages covering multiple years of writing,
                 speaking, and judicial processes) makes it difficult to
                 ascertain if specific representations of perspectives of
                 TE Johnson are his actual or present theological
                 convictions. We understand from the Record:

                   - he has acknowledged some of his perspectives
                     have matured over time;
                   - he has acknowledged some were poorly stated
                     due to time limits, situational pressures, or
                     extemporaneity;
                   - some representations of perspectives are made
                     unclear by imprecision or disagreement over
                     what aspect of sin is being referenced in specific
                     statements;
                   - some representations have been extrapolated by
                     critics but denied by Johnson.

                 Thus, the SJC offers TE Johnson the opportunity to
                 answer questions with reference to the specific
                 Allegations in the Complaint now before the
                 Commission. Below are 25 questions arranged by the
                 Allegations, with a fifth category titled “Additional/
                 General.”

05/11/21   Presbytery answered the SJC Question about the Q&A in the
           Record between the Missouri investigative committee and TE
           Johnson from Fall 2019 and early 2020. This was the one question
           from the SJC directed to Presbytery out of the 25 questions sent
           down.
                                    743
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



05/20/21      TE Johnson provided a 23-page document responding to the
              SJC’s 25 Questions.

05/27/21      Complainant filed a five-page Addendum to his Preliminary
              Brief.

05/31/21      Respondent filed a five-page Addendum to his Preliminary
              Brief. Neither party requested another Hearing.

07/13/21      Reconvened SJC Meeting. Five names were pulled at random to
              comprise a Drafting Committee tasked to present a proposed
              decision. Committee included TEs Coffin and Lee, and REs
              Donahoe, Dowling, and Neikirk.

09/21/21      SJC Drafting Committee filed its report to the SJC.

10/21/21      SJC’s Fall Stated Meeting in Atlanta.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

   1. Did Presbytery violate BCO 31-2 in the manner of its
      investigation of the allegations?

   2. Did Missouri Presbytery clearly err at its meeting on July 21,
      2020, when it declined to commence process on any of the
      following four allegations?

       2.a.     Allegation 1: SSA & sin - TE Johnson “denies that
                same-sex-attraction is sinful and thereby fails to
                properly distinguish misery from the sin which give rise
                to it.”

       2.b. Allegation 2: Identity - TE Johnson “compromises and
            dishonors his identity in Christ by self-identifying as a
            same-sex-attracted man.”

       2.c.     Allegation 3: Sanctification - TE Johnson “denies
                God’s purpose and power to sanctify SSA [same-sex-
                attracted] believers by minimizing the pursuit of
                orientation change from homosexual to heterosexual.”


                                       744
                                   APPENDIX T



          2.d. Allegation 4: Qualification - TE Johnson “cannot meet
               the biblical ‘above reproach’ qualification for the
               eldership since (a) homosexual inclinations are sin
               proper and are more heinous for being “against nature,”
               and since (b) TE Johnson identifies as a homosexually-
               inclined man.”

III. JUDGMENT

   1.       No
   2.a.     No
   2.b.     No
   2.c.     No
   2.d.     No

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

This Reasoning and Opinion briefly explains why the SJC did not find that
Presbytery was unreasonable in its decisions declining to indict.

Issue 1 - BCO 31-2 Investigation

          BCO 31-2. It is the duty of all church Sessions and
          Presbyteries to exercise care over those subject to their
          authority. They shall with due diligence and great
          discretion demand from such persons satisfactory
          explanations concerning reports affecting their Christian
          character. This duty is more imperative when those who
          deem themselves aggrieved by injurious reports shall ask
          an investigation.
              If such investigation, however originating, should
          result in raising a strong presumption of the guilt of the
          party involved, the court shall institute process, and shall
          appoint a prosecutor to prepare the indictment and to
          conduct the case. This prosecutor shall be a member of the
          court, except that in a case before the Session, he may be
          any communing member of the same congregation with
          the accused.

The Record demonstrates Presbytery sought to exercise the requisite “due
diligence and great discretion” in seeking explanations from TE Johnson
                                        745
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



regarding the four allegations. There is no evidence that Presbytery
committed clear error in its procedures in this area. Whether the explanations
provided were satisfactory is a different issue that will be addressed next.

Issue 2 - Four Allegations –

The SJC does not find that the Presbytery clearly erred in its exercise of
judgment when it declined to commence formal judicial process (i.e., declined
to order an indictment and appoint a prosecutor) on any of the four allegations.

Below are those four allegations, followed by quotes from the Complaint in
support of those allegations. The SJC then provides examples of TE Johnson’s
explanations/responses on each allegation. These examples include 9
statements from TE Johnson to the Missouri Presbytery investigating
committee and 19 answers to questions (shown in italics) from the SJC. The
excerpts from the statements before MOP make plausible the conclusion that
it was not unreasonable for the Presbytery to decline to indict. This judgment
is supported by the excerpts from TE Johnson’s answers to the questions posed
by the SJC, questions posed to clarify the Record of the Case because its
magnitude (over 600 pages that included multiple years of writing and
speaking by TE Johnson, as well as various allegations, Presbytery reports,
and judicial processes) made it difficult to ascertain if specific representations
of perspectives of TE Johnson were his actual theological convictions.

                                  Allegation 1
      “TE Johnson denies that same-sex-attraction is sinful and thereby
    fails to properly distinguish misery from the sin which give rise to it.”

Related to this allegation, Complainant contends the following:

        -   “TE Johnson draws a false analogy between the merely
            physical and passive condition of cancer and the spiritual
            and active orientation of homosexuality that goes far
            beyond mere suffering due to the curse.”

        -   “TE Johnson does not believe one can really repent of this
            corruption (i.e., the homosexual orientation), since he was
            made or born this way genetically (CRM Report, p. 10).
            Such "movements of internal corruption" we should flee or
            resist, not mortify or confess (p. 11). You can only "ask


                                       746
                                    APPENDIX T



              forgiveness for a sin, for an action, a word, a thought, a
              deed, a choice ... " (CRM, p. 17).”

          -   “... TE Johnson misplaces same-sex attraction into the
              category of original sin and not into the category of actual
              transgressions.”

          -   “TE Johnson appears to have created a middle ground
              between the Roman Catholic view of concupiscence and
              the Protestant view of actual transgression. He calls the
              enticement to sin sinful (unlike Roman Catholicism), but
              he denies that inward enticement is itself a sin.”

          -   “... TE Johnson consistently affirms that apart from the
              conscious act of the will, a sinful desire is not "a sin" that
              requires formal, true repentance (e.g., CRM, pp. 9-10, 15-
              16, 20). Same-sex attraction is "not 'a sin' unless there is
              volition," according to TE Johnson (CRM, p. 16).”

If the Record demonstrated that the above statements were an accurate
summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper to sustain the
Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it was not
unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not hold these
positions and that he affirms the sinfulness of fallen desires, including all
sexual attractions a person might have to someone not their spouse.

Thus, for example, in response to a question from the Presbytery’s
investigating committee, TE Johnson stated the following:

    GJ:       I don't recall saying that same-sex attraction is a morally
              neutral condition. I have repeatedly stated otherwise. Any
              time I sense an internal sexual or romantic pull toward
              anyone God has not given me—including any male by
              definition—I have to recognize that pull for what it is. It is
              an effect of the fall, yes, but more precisely it is the pull of
              what St. Paul terms the flesh. It's a motion of the internal
              corruption that remains in the believer throughout this life.
              “This corruption of nature, during this life, doth remain in
              those that are regenerated” (see WCF 6.4-6). This
              temptation is “original corruption” and is “properly called


                                         747
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            sin,” even when it does not lead to “actual sin.” Apart from
            Christ, I would carry the guilt of original corruption.”

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:

SJC 1.b. Do you concur that any illicit desire or inclination in your heart (even
if it arises unbidden from the corruption of nature and does not result in an
outwardly sinful act), is properly identified as sin, brings guilt upon you, and
must be confessed, repented of, and mortified? (ROC 923, Q #2)

        Yes, I concur. Sin is not merely transgression of the law of
        God. Sin is any want of conformity unto it. We are not sinners
        because we sin. We sin because we are sinners. I agree with
        WCF 6 that internal corruption is properly called sin. We are
        to turn humbly to God in repentance always, both on account
        of what we do and on account of what we are.

SJC 1.c. Do you believe that you should repent of (i.e., confess as contrary to
righteousness, acknowledge as personal guilt, sorrow for, and strive to
forsake) any corruption of your heart that is present in you due to original sin,
as well as to repent particularly of any particular sins (ROC 928, ln 1ff.)?

        Yes, to both questions. I agree with WCF 15.5.

SJC 1.d. Do you attempt, by saying that “the Christian is called to repent of
(that is, to confess and forsake) actual sins … and to proactively ‘mortify’
original corruption (as well as all the actual sins flowing from it”) [see ROC
928, ln 1ff.] to segregate some aspect of original corruption as a category of
sin that does not carry personal guilt or does not require repentance
characterized by confession, mortification, and forsaking?

        No. That is not my intention. All sin, whether original or actual,
        carries personal guilt and requires all of this.

SJC 2. MOP’s Committee concluded, “We believe it has been and continues
to be TE Johnson’s view that homoerotic desire is sinful – not as “a sin,” an
ungodly volitional act, but as indwelling sin, a particular manifestation or
“motion” (WCF VI.5) of our original corruption.” (ROC 924) How do you
define “motion” and how does that definition comport with other uses of the
term “motions” in the Standards (i.e., Larger Catechism 147 and 148)?
                                      748
                                 APPENDIX T



       In WCF 6.4, the Assembly distinguished between the
       “original corruption” conveyed to all humanity and the
       “actual transgressions” which “proceed” from that corruption.
       This original corruption includes four elements within the
       confession, namely that “we are utterly indisposed,”
       “disabled,” “made opposite to all good” and are “wholly
       inclined to all evil” (WCF 6.4). As part of our original
       corruption, the confession here distinguishes this
       “inclination” to evil from the “actual transgressions” that
       proceed from it.

       Of course, if the inclination to sin were itself “actual
       transgression,” then that would have applied to any potential
       sexual attraction to someone God has not given us, whether
       male or female. But the divines chose to categorize the
       inclination to sin as a facet of original corruption, and not as
       actual transgression. (We are morally culpable either way.) ...

       Here, the point would be that both the corruption and its
       promptings, proposals, or initiatives (its temptations) are truly
       and properly sin—and not merely human weakness, contrary
       to the Roman Church. As A.A. Hodge explains in his
       commentary on the chapter, “The great burden of pollution
       and guilt is felt to consist not in what we have done, but in
       what we are—our permanent moral condition rather than our
       actual transgressions.”

SJC 4. What does it mean to say that SSA is “of sin” but not “a sin”? Is
something that is merely “of sin” morally culpable before God?

       That is language I adopted from the 2017 Missouri Presbytery
       report on sexuality. The distinction is not between degrees of
       culpability, but between degrees of volition. We are culpable
       both for what we do (transgression) and also for what we are
       (any lack of conformity unto). Since sexual temptation (of any
       kind) arises from our own heart, we are always culpable.
       “Each one is tempted when, by his own evil desire, he is
       dragged away and enticed” (James 1:14). I use the phrase “a
       sin” in its vernacular sense as a synonym for “actual sin.”
       When speaking of the motions of original corruption, I am


                                     749
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        more likely to speak of “indwelling sin.” Temptations are “of
        sin” in that they are “motions of” original sin/internal
        corruption.

SJC 5. Do you have any disagreement with WCF 6.4, 6.5 or 6.6 in its
formulation and description of sin, actual or original? If so, identify any
differences in detail. 18

        I have no differences with the formulation in WCF 6.4, 6.5 or
        6.6. I have leaned heavily on these categories in my teaching
        on the topic of sexuality in recent years.

                                Allegation 2:
        “TE Johnson compromises and dishonors his identity in Christ
              by self-identifying as a same-sex-attracted man.”

Related to this allegation, Complainant contends the following:

        -    “When asked about the question of identity or self-
             conception (within the context of the 2019 GA
             affirmation of the Nashville Statement), TE Johnson side-
             stepped the question entirely (CRM Report, p. 26).”
             [ROC 5, line 157-158]

        -    “TE Johnson may not describe himself as a "gay
             Christian" personally and publicly, but he never declares
             such a self-designation to be wrong and contrary to God's
             Word. He refuses to do so, it seems. Why?” [ROC 6, line
             189-191]


18 WCF 6.4     From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed,
  disabled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed
  all actual transgressions.
  WCF 6.5 This corruption of nature, during this life, doth remain in those that are
  regenerated; and although it be, through Christ, pardoned, and subdued; yet both it,
  and all the motions thereof, are truly and properly sin.
  WCF 6.6 Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of the righteous
  law of God, and contrary thereunto, doth, in its own nature, bring guilt upon the
  sinner, whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse of the law, and so
  made subject to death, with all miseries spiritual, temporal, and eternal.


                                         750
                                  APPENDIX T



If the Record demonstrated that the above statements were an accurate
summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper to sustain the
Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it was not
unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not hold these
positions and that TE Johnson’s statements, responses, and explanations—
taken as a whole—do not undermine or contradict his identity as a new
creation in Christ.

Thus, for example, in responding to the Presbytery’s investigating committee,
TE Johnson stated the following:

    GJ:   I have avoided the couplet "gay Christian" because of its
          historical connection to the Gay Christian Network, an
          affirming group. Also, it's not my Christianity that's gay. It's
          my sexual orientation that is. ... For me, my fallen sexual
          orientation is not my identity. As I wrote in CT, "My sexual
          orientation doesn’t define me. It’s not the most important or
          most interesting thing about me.

    GJ:   If by identity, you mean the core identity that defines me,
          the identity that then becomes what I aspire more fully to
          be, then no Christian should have a fallen sexual orientation
          as their core identity. Our core identity as Christians is that
          we have been adopted as sons of Father into his family.
          That's the objective identity that names and claims me and
          to which I owe my life, my love and my treasure.

    GJ:   If a believer were celebrating their fallen sexuality, then
          there's obviously a problem with that.

    GJ:   [From an email to someone who posted a critique of
          Johnson’s Christianity Today testimony.] You express well
          how you cannot understand why anyone would celebrate a
          sin-identity as part of the Christian experience, and I agree.
          I have no interest in celebrating the sinful impulse of
          indwelling sin that so disorders my sexuality. I simply want
          to acknowledge that reality, not to celebrate it ...

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:


                                       751
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



SJC 6.a. Because “All saints, that are united to Jesus Christ their Head, by
his Spirit, and by faith, have fellowship with him in his graces, sufferings,
death, resurrection, and glory” (WCF 26.1) and all Christians have an
obligation to honor that union with the profession of our identity in Christ as
well as our obedience to him, have you compromised that profession by
changing your [previously expressed] view that Christians “ought to reckon
their identity, their conception of self, in a way that is indexed to the once-for-
all judgment Christ has executed against sin, the world and Satan in his death
and resurrection” (see ROC 827; 968, ln 9-12)?

        No. Jesus is everything to me. ... Every sermon I preach is a
        proclamation of the saving lordship of Jesus Christ and his
        calling to live out our new identity in him.

SJC 6.b. Have you changed your agreement with Statement 9 in the Ad Interim
Study Committee Report on Human Sexuality? If you have, present differences,
please explain them.

        I have no disagreement with Statement 9 of the Ad Interim
        Study Committee Report on Human Sexuality, provided that
        it is held alongside the other statements in the AIC report. ...
        In fact, I have no disagreement with the underlying
        theological or moral structure of the entire report. The
        concerns I will voice will be pastoral and missiological in
        nature.

SJC 6.c. Regardless of whether you agree with Complainant that the Bible
never describes believers with a sinful modifier, given your understanding of
Biblical emphases indicated in [the two questions] above, along with your own
testimony that serious misconceptions can occur with Christian’s unqualified
identification of themselves as “gay” or “SSA” or “homosexual,” do you
understand how you might avoid misunderstanding and bring peace to the
church by using wording such as that suggested by concerned brothers below
(1 Cor. 8:12-13)?

    E.g., # 1 “This does not mean that Christians do not continue to struggle
    with sin all their life long. It means that such a believer ought not consider
    himself a drunkard Christian or an adulterer Christian or a homosexual
    Christian but rather a Christian who struggles with the temptation to
    drunkenness, adultery, or homosexuality….” [emphasis added, ROC 576,
    ln 256ff.]
                                       752
                                 APPENDIX T




    E.g., #2 ‘'I’m a Christian fighting against sexual lust, or pride, or
    worshiping idols, or lying, or gossiping" (ROC 6, ln 181-2).

If you will not use such wording as suggested in these examples, please
explain why?

        I have never once described myself as a “gay Christian.” Even
        in my GA speech, I said, “I am still same-sex attracted.” And
        when speaking about myself, I have always qualified
        whatever term I have used. ... I have never spoken of my
        sexual orientation without also speaking of my agreement
        with biblical teaching and my commitment to walk with Jesus
        in celibacy. ...

        The AIC notes that the term may be used as “a factual
        observation about one’s experiences,” but that believers
        should be mindful that others may assume something more by
        the term (AIC 30, lines 4-5-8). But I want to be heard by my
        fathers and brothers. Some of my detractors have claimed I
        identify as a “gay Christian,” but they have never been able to
        quote me as such. It is a couplet I have not and do not use.
        Those who do use it have their reasons, and I do not judge
        them or quarrel over words. (We owe them the judgment of
        charity. Most are merely trying to say they are “gay” and they
        are “Christian.” They are not typically intending to modify
        “Christian” or promote some new form of Christianity that is
        “gay.”) Still, I have always avoided this couplet. ...

        My actual daily struggle with sexual temptation is no different
        from other Christian men. I look away when tempted. I don't
        take that second glance. I meet with an elder weekly for
        accountability. I avoid unmonitored internet connections. I
        invest in Christian friendships in which I am known. I have
        Covenant Eyes on my phone. That experience is required of
        any Christian man walking in repentance. Being same-sex
        attracted does not increase my struggle against sexual
        temptation, per se.

        Again, as the AIC on sexuality states,


                                     753
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                    “How then should we think of the language of sexual
                    orientation? Insofar as the term orientation is used
                    descriptively to articulate a particular set of
                    experiences, namely the persistent and predominant
                    sexual attractions of an individual, it can remain
                    useful as a way of classifying those experiences in
                    contrast to the experiences of the majority of other
                    people” (AIC p.30 line 41 – p.31 line 1).

                              Allegation 3
  “TE Johnson denies God's purpose and power to sanctify SSA believers
   by minimizing the pursuit of orientation change from homosexual to
                             heterosexual.”

Related to this allegation, Complainant contends the following. (See also the
discussion in Allegation 1.)

          -     The problem arises when those who claim that same-sex
                attraction is so strong, that it is such a significant part of
                their lives, that they find their identity in this disposition.
                Further, they claim that this one particular sin is the only
                one that cannot be changed through the process of
                sanctification.

If the Record demonstrated that the above statement, and those in Allegation
1, were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been
proper to sustain the Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds
that it was not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does
not hold these positions and that TE Johnson affirms the reality and hope of
progressive sanctification.

Thus, for example, in response to a question from the Presbytery’s
investigating committee, TE Johnson stated the following:

    GJ:       God can do anything. He can do miracles. But the normal
              pattern in this fallen world is that this is a lifelong struggle.
              I know I will be delivered from temptation when my Lord
              Jesus brings me to glory. I know of no promise in the Bible
              that believers will no longer experience temptation in this
              life. Read Paul in Romans 7. He was not delivered from
              temptation in this life. As the confession expresses so
                                           754
                                  APPENDIX T



          succinctly (WCF 6.5) “This corruption of nature, during this
          life, doth remain in those that are regenerated.” As Calvin
          explained in his discussion of Romans 6, “So long as you
          live, sin must needs be in your members. At least let it be
          deprived of mastery. Let not what it bids be done.” This
          also lines up with the experience of most believers who are
          same-sex-attracted.
                 Longtime Harvest USA director Tim Geiger has
          stated that he has also never seen same-sex attraction go
          away—in himself or anyone else. I suspect there are cases
          out there. But ordinarily this is a lifetime struggle.

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:

SJC 8.a. Because our Confession acknowledges that, though our
“sanctification is … yet imperfect in this life, there abiding still some remnants
of corruption in every part; whence ariseth a continual and irreconcilable
war” (WCF 13.2); “in which war, although the remaining corruption, for a
time, may much prevail; yet, through the continual supply of strength from the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ, the regenerate part doth overcome; and so, the
saints grow in grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of God” (WCF 13.3), do
you affirm that it is possible for God to reduce or eliminate same-sex attraction
from the inclinations and desires of a believer (see ROC, 943 ln 31ff.)?

        Yes, it is possible for God to reduce homoerotic temptation
        from the inclinations and desires of a believer. It is also
        possible for God to eliminate such temptations, although this
        has been much, much rarer in practice. ... I have known others
        like myself who, while still only ever distracted by the same
        sex, have found the frequency of these distractions has
        lessened through the decades. While that may be partly a
        function of aging, I would like to think progressive
        sanctification has played a role in this.

        But struggle against sexual temptation is typically lifelong,
        whatever one's orientation, especially with men. ...

        As the AIC Report on Sexuality explains:



                                       755
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                The error of some Christian approaches to same-sex
                sexual desire has been to tie faithfulness to the
                elimination of homosexual temptation (or even the
                development of heterosexual desire) as though if
                Christians really did enough therapy, had enough
                faith, or repented sufficiently, God would deliver
                them in some final and complete way, changing their
                orientation (AIC p.25, lines 11-14).

SJC 8.b. Do you affirm that it is proper to expect that “through the continual
supply of strength from the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, the regenerate part
doth overcome; and so, the saints grow in grace,” even if total elimination of
sinful inclinations is uncommon?”

        Yes, I affirm this. “And we all, with unveiled face, beholding
        the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same
        image from one degree of glory to another. For this comes
        from the Lord who is the Spirit” (2 Corinthians 3:18). This is
        a lifelong process. “Not that I have already obtained this or
        am already perfect, but I press on to make it my own, because
        Christ Jesus has made me his own” (Philippians 3:12).
         “It is God’s will that you should be sanctified,” scripture
        states (1 Thessalonians 4:3).

        Again, the degree of change has most often been less than we
        had hoped. I for example wanted a wife and children, but what
        I got instead was half a century of virginity and lots of spiritual
        children. I have grown in my love for Jesus, in prayer, in
        intimacy with God. My anger has turned to gentleness, my
        impatience to longsuffering, and my endless lust to mere
        distractions.

        I can affirm exactly what this passage states, and it has been
        my own experience, that the regenerate part is overcoming
        and I have grown in grace, though the total elimination of
        sinful inclinations has not occurred. I look forward to this in
        glory.

SJC 8.c. Do you affirm that the process of sanctification – even when
accompanied by many weaknesses and imperfections (WCF 16.5, 6), with the
Spirit and the flesh warring against one another until final glorification (WCF
                                       756
                                  APPENDIX T



13.2) – should give Christians biblical cause to “expect to see the regenerate
nature increasingly overcome the remaining corruption of the flesh, but this
progress will often be slow and uneven” (ROC 850 lines 26-27, from AIC
Statement 7).

        Yes, I affirm this. Jesus does change lives, and that change is
        progressive. ... Nothing I have stated has ever been intended
        to suggest otherwise. ... Spiritual growth is toward holiness,
        not necessarily toward heterosexuality. And progressive
        sanctification, while absolutely real, remains partial in this
        life. In his 1646 Mortification of Sin, John Owen cautions us,
        “To mortify a sin is not utterly to kill, root it out and destroy
        it, that it should have no more hold at all nor residence in our
        hearts…. This is not in this life to be accomplished. An utter
        killing and destruction of it … is not in this life to be
        expected.” Rather, Owen sees ongoing struggle as a means of
        God's ministry to us. “God, by our infirmity and weakness,
        keep[s] us in continual dependence on him for teaching and
        revelations of himself out of his word, never in this world
        bringing any soul to the utmost.” As WCF 6.5 states so
        succinctly, “This corruption of nature, during this life, doth
        remain in those that are regenerated.” If, as I have argued,
        same-sex attraction is part of our “original corruption”—
        specifically the part about being “inclined to all evil” (WCF
        6.4), then we should not be surprised to have to battle the
        motions of such underlying corruption until delivered into
        glory at death.

        The above quote from the AIC report continues with this same
        precise and necessary qualification.

                “Moreover, the process of mortification and
                vivification involves the whole person, not simply
                unwanted sexual desires. The aim of sanctification in
                one's sexual life cannot be reduced to attraction to
                persons of the opposite sex (though some persons
                may experience movement in this direction), but
                rather involves growing in grace and perfecting
                holiness in the fear of God.”



                                      757
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        Yes, sanctification is real and progressive, even while the
        flesh and Spirit continue their war. In this war, grace has the
        winning hand.

SJC 8.d. Do you affirm with our Confession that “they, who are once
effectually called, and regenerated, having a new heart, and a new spirit
created in them, are further sanctified, really and personally,” since the …
“dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof
are more and more weakened and mortified; and they more and more
quickened and strengthened in all saving graces to the practice of true
holiness” WCF 13.1”)
And do you by this affirmation, acknowledge that you will preach and teach
that Christians who struggle with SSA should believe that the dominion of sin
in their lives is broken, and that they can expect for the attraction to be
weakened and mortified as they are strengthened by the Word and Spirit in the
practice of true holiness?

        Yes. I do affirm with our Confession that “they, who are once
        effectually called, and regenerated, having a new heart, and a
        new spirit created in them, are further sanctified, really and
        personally,” since the … “dominion of the whole body of sin
        is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof are more and more
        weakened and mortified; and they more and more quickened
        and strengthened in all saving graces to the practice of true
        holiness.”

        All Christians should believe that the dominion of sin in their
        lives is broken, though it is the lusts that are weakened in
        WCF 13.1. Christians can expect for the lusts of the heart to
        be weakened and mortified as the believer is strengthened by
        the Word and Spirit in the practice of true holiness.

        Typically, a believer who is same-sex attracted can expect the
        same degree of freedom from sexual temptation that a straight
        believer can ordinarily expect through progressive
        sanctification. We are new creations in Christ. We are no
        longer slaves to sin that we must obey its commands. God will
        not allow us to be tempted beyond what we are able but will
        provide a way of escape. Jesus said we must pick up our cross
        daily and die. Without holiness, no one will see the Lord. A


                                     758
                                   APPENDIX T



        godly character is formed through decades of faithfulness and
        obedience.

        At the same time, again, the confession is nuanced, balancing
        these words with the qualification that “This sanctification is
        throughout, in the whole man; yet imperfect in this life, there
        abiding still some remnants of corruption in every part;
        whence ariseth a continual and irreconcilable war, the flesh
        lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh”
        (WCF 13.2). We must hold both of these realities or we leave
        the flock either enslaved by sin (on one side) or crushed by
        unrealistic and unbiblical expectations on the other.

        I know octogenarians who tell me they are still distracted
        when a beautiful woman walks in the room. But they have
        seen genuine increased freedom from the pull of sexual
        temptation, albeit less than they might have wanted or hoped
        for. John Murray—also a lifelong celibate until he married
        during his retirement at the age of sixty-nine—explained:
        “There is a total difference between surviving sin and reigning
        sin, the regenerate in conflict with sin and the unregenerate
        complacent with sin. . . . It is one thing for sin to live in us; it
        is another for us to live in sin.”

SJC 9. Do you affirm your agreement with the Statement #7 in the Report of
the Ad Interim Study Committee on Human Sexuality? If you have present
differences, please explain them.

        I think Statement 7 is beautifully written and well nuanced. I
        am in full agreement with it.

SJC 10. On ROC 943, in response to [MOP] Committee Question 5a, you
respond that delivery from same sex attraction would take a “miracle” and
that “the normal pattern in this fallen world is that this is a lifelong struggle.”
You then cite Paul’s statements in Romans 7 as evidence of this ongoing
struggle. But Paul also continually calls us not only to cease from sin, but to
live in accordance with God’s Law. For example, Ephesians 4:28 requires not
just avoiding theft (or temptations to steal) but a positive commitment to
“labor, doing honest work.” Similarly, Ephesians 5:4 does not call us only to
avoid filthy talk, but to speak “thanksgiving” (its opposite). More generally,
the Ten Commandments not only forbid sin, but enjoin righteousness. Do you
                                        759
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



believe it is (ordinarily, outside of a miracle) impossible to give up a proclivity
to murder? Theft? Lying? If not, how is it that same sex attraction is different
from all these other sins?

        When I state that “sexual orientation does not typically
        change,” I am not saying that God doesn't change lives. Look
        at TE Tim Geiger. Look at TE Allan Edwards. Look at RE
        Luke Calvin. Look at RE Jim Pocta. None of these brothers
        claims to have been freed from the presence of same-sex
        temptation. ... All of these are walking miracles and proof of
        the gospel's power to radically reorient a life to God. My point
        has been and remains that none of this is evidence of a gay-
        to-straight cure. ...

        Same-sex sexual attraction is very similar to opposite-sex
        sexual attraction. Opposite-sex sexual attraction for someone
        other than your spouse is also a motion of the corrupt nature
        tempting you to sin. As such, it too is properly called sin. That
        sexual pull toward your neighbor's wife is not morally neutral.
        It is sin to mortify.

        But it doesn't typically go away, either. It may be weakened,
        but it is rare that a Christian man does not feel sexual
        temptation. ...

        Just as we don't instruct believers attracted to the opposite sex
        to expect all sexual feelings to disappear, we cannot expect
        that of believers with same-sex attraction. The absence of
        temptation is not a standard that straight men have ever lived
        up to.

        The Bible does present to us a movement from sin to its
        opposite. But the opposite of homosexual sin is not
        heterosexual sin. The opposite is holiness. ...

        The AIC report suggests this physiological component by
        trying (sic) homosexual orientation not merely to
        original/indwelling sin, but also to our state of misery. “The
        origins and development of sexual desire remain complex
        and, in many ways, mysterious. It is possible to conceive of
        the experience of same-sex attraction as simultaneously a part
                                       760
                                      APPENDIX T



           of the remaining corruption of original sin as well as the
           misery of living in a fallen world, one of the ways our bodies
           themselves groan for redemption (Rom. 8:22-23; WCF 6.6;
           WLC 17-19)” (AIC p.28 line 5). Fallen biology may account
           for much of this reality. “However, we must also acknowledge
           … the ways in which the Fall has shaped our biological and
           social development” (AIC p.27, lines 37-39).

                                 Allegation 4
 “TE Johnson cannot meet the biblical ‘above reproach’ qualification for the
                                  eldership
  since (a) homosexual inclinations are sin proper and are more heinous for
       being ‘against nature,’ and since (b) TE Johnson identifies as a
                        homosexually-inclined man.”

If the Complainant had demonstrated, for example, that the minister was
involved in homosexual behavior, cultivated unrepentant lustings, taught that
either of those were not sinful, or was not continually seeking to mortify those
temptations, it would have been proper to sustain the Complaint. The Record
demonstrates it was not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE
Johnson pursues Spirit-empowered victory over his sinful temptations and
actions, just as another man must do with heterosexual temptations toward
someone not his wife.19

Thus, for example, in response to the Presbytery’s investigating committee,
TE Johnson stated the following:


19    At the Hearing, the Complainant indicated he questioned whether the ESV
     accurately translates 1 Cor. 6:9 when it uses the phrase, “men who practice
     homosexuality.” However, the footnote in the ESV indicates: “The two Greek terms
     translated by this phrase refer to the passive and active partners in consensual
     homosexual acts.”
        In the 48th GA’s AIC Report on Sexuality, footnote 4 for Statement 1 reads as
     follows: “Paul coined the term arsenokoitai (1 Cor. 6:9; 1 Tim. 1:10) from the use
     of two related terms in the Septuagint version of Leviticus 18 and 20. The basic
     meaning is “man-bedders” or men who have sex with other men. ... The combination
     of arsenokoitai and malakoi, uniquely used in the New Testament in 1 Corinthians
     6:9, likely refers most directly—as per the ESV footnote—to the active and passive
     partners in consensual homosexual activity. For more extended discussion, see
     Chapter 5 in Kevin DeYoung, What Does the Bible Really Say About
     Homosexuality? (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015).”

                                           761
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   GJ:   The 5th General Assembly of the PCA in 1977 declared that
         “a practicing homosexual continuing in this sin would not
         be a fit candidate for ordination or membership in the
         Presbyterian Church in America.” ... Within the PCA, the
         categories were “practicing homosexual” and “non-
         practicing homosexual.” Only the former category was
         barred from membership and ordained ministry.

   GJ:   So how do I view my orientation? Well, it's obviously
         fallen. No one ever had to convince me of that. ... This
         means that mortification of sexual sin has been a daily part
         of my Christian experience these last thirty years. That
         means fleeing temptation; I've never been able to join a gym
         or enter a locker room. That means redirecting thoughts.
         That means accountability. (I've met with an elder every
         Thursday for the past 18 years for prayer. He gets my
         Covenant Eyes report to help me stay faithful.)

   GJ:   I'm a sinner and so it feels wrong for me to appeal to any
         righteousness I may have. I’m a virgin who—as I said in my
         GA floor speech last year—mortifies my indwelling sin
         daily. But my sin is ever before me. I can mention the more
         than a decade since I've looked at porn, but I know Proverbs
         6:16-19. The point is that we don't judge based on what
         sinful temptation a minister experiences so much as what he
         does with that temptation. If a minister of the gospel
         faithfully mortifies his temptation toward gay sex or
         slander, developing over decades a character that
         consistently if imperfectly does what God wants (and not
         what indwelling sin wants), that is a character that others
         close to him will see as being above reproach. But the
         minister himself feels like a “wicked man” with no hope but
         in God's sovereign grace to “save me from this body of
         death.” ... [I]f a minister instead engages in more seriously,
         without particular repentance, they have no basis for an
         actual gay sex or actual slander, then Paul's logic would
         seem to indicate that such a minister is unfit for office. And
         much assurance of salvation.

In addition, in responding to the following questions posed by the SJC to
complete the Record, TE Johnson stated the following:
                                     762
                                  APPENDIX T




SJC 11. In light of the PCA's statements on homosexuality, Scripture, and the
Westminster Standards, how can a same-sex attracted/homosexual elder, who
is chaste, be considered above reproach?

        I don't see too much difference from how one ordinarily
        concludes that a minister is above reproach. It is not
        temptation that disqualifies a man—then we would all be
        disqualified. As Al Mohler writes, “Every single human being
        who has experienced puberty has a sexual orientation that, in
        some way, falls short of the glory of God.” It's a level field at
        the foot of the cross.

        What places a minister above reproach is the Lord's work in
        developing a Christian character trained through perseverance
        to trust and obey Jesus Christ in the face of temptation. That
        includes love for God, the pursuit of holiness, the practice of
        godliness, personal integrity, humility, self-sacrificial love for
        people, wise use of spiritual gifts, biblical and confessional
        orthodoxy and the approbation of God's people.

        I do experience same-sex temptation. (I call it same-sex
        distraction because I'm just trying to serve my Lord when it
        tries to distract me from that.) I know other pastors in this
        denomination that experience other temptations like the
        temptation to slander. Those who have gay sex and those who
        slander are both listed 1 Corinthians 6 among those who “will
        not inherit the kingdom.” The Hebrew scriptures similarly call
        gay sex an abomination to the LORD (Leviticus 18:22). The
        same scriptures call “spreading strife among brothers” an
        abomination to the LORD (Proverbs 6:16-19). There are
        additional sins that also get this same categorization.

        The point is that we don't judge by what sinful temptation a
        minister experiences in his heart so much as by what he does
        with that temptation. Does he proactively mortify his sin?

        If a minister of the gospel faithfully mortifies his temptation
        toward homoeroticism or slander (or lust, or anger, etc.),
        developing over decades a character that consistently if
        imperfectly does what God wants (and not what indwelling
                                       763
            MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



sin wants), that is a character that others close to him will see
as being above reproach.

I have been a leader in the same congregation for 27 years. I
am known. They view me as above reproach, as does the
presbytery in which I have been member these past 19 years—
and before that, an intern for about six years. They see all the
effort I put into honoring God with my sexuality. They know
how I see sin always crouching at my door, requiring me to
remain always prepared to battle it. They know I have never
been sexually active. I have never held hands, snuggled or
looked longingly into someone’s eyes. They know I have only
kissed once, and that was with a girl in high school before I
knew the Lord. They know I have not looked at porn in over
17 years. They know the same ruling elder and I have met for
coffee and to pray every Thursday morning for twenty years,
and that he gets my Covenant Eyes report. They know I never
go near a gym or locker room to avoid any potential
temptation or even distraction. They know how I proactively
work on having close, long-term Christian friendships in order
to proactively mortify the loneliness that might occasion
sexual temptation. They know how I respect men and women
as image bearers of God and live in joyful submission to my
savior Jesus Christ. They have seen all the fruit of the Spirit
in me. Those who know me honor God's work in my life and
see in it hope that the gospel truly has power to change us.
That is the approbation of God's people for a regenerate
sinner’s life lived in saving union with Jesus Christ in a way
that is above reproach. ...

The Presbyterian Church in America itself declared in 1977
only that “practicing homosexuals”—as distinct from non-
practicing homosexuals—were not suitable candidates for
ordination. Three years later, the 1980 RPCES report on
homosexuality specifically rejected any categorical exclusion
of “repentant homosexuals” from church office. This year's
AIC report states the same position, “Insofar as such persons
display the requisite Christian maturity, we do not consider
this sin struggle automatically to disqualify someone for
leadership in the church (1 Cor. 6:911, 1 Tim. 3:1-7, Titus 1:6-
9; 2 Pet. 1:3-11),” (AIC p. 31, lines 29-31).
                              764
                                 APPENDIX T



        Our AIC report on sexuality commends those of us who have
        persevered in the face of homoerotic temptation:

                Our brothers and sisters who resist and repent
                of enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are
                powerful examples to us all of what this ‘daily
                mortification’ looks like in ‘the best of
                believers.’ We should be encouraged and
                challenged by their example and eager to join
                in fellowship with them for the mutual
                strengthening of our faith, hope, and love.
                (AIC p.23, lines 30-33).

        The [AIC] report offers further commendation of those who
        model for the rest of the church what costly obedience looks
        like.

                Finally, we rejoice with our brothers and
                sisters who, while experiencing ongoing
                attraction to the same sex and living in a
                culture which would encourage them to
                embrace and act on those attractions, instead
                pursue lives of faithfulness through chastity
                and obedience to Christ by daily echoing
                Jesus’s words of “not my will, but yours, be
                done” with respect to their sexuality (Luke
                22:42). In this, they model for us all what it
                means to heed Jesus’ teaching: “If anyone
                would come after me, let him deny himself
                and take up his cross and follow me” (Mark
                8:34). May it be that thanks to the finished
                work of Christ, and at the end of our
                sometimes faltering and imperfect obedience,
                we each hear the divine accolade: “Well done,
                good and faithful servant.”

SJC 12. Is homosexuality a heinous sin? If so, why? If not, why not? (Please
support your answer from the Standards and interact with Larger Catechism
150-151)



                                     765
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         Sins are not all equally heinous (WLC 150). But they are all
        heinous. Having sex with someone of the same sex is very
        heinous. Before we ever get to the Standards, the Bible is clear
        on this point. For a man to lie with another man as one lies
        with a woman, it is an abomination. Paul picks up the Hebrew
        of Leviticus—arsenokoitai, literally “male bed”—to prohibit
        it in no uncertain terms as sin that that will keep a man out of
        the kingdom.

        A sin can be aggravated by any number of factors. Sexual
        immorality is a heinous sin. But the sin can be aggravated, for
        example, by that immorality being with another man's wife.
        Or with someone in our church, where we were in a position
        of spiritual leadership over them. Sexual immorality with
        someone of the same sex would be yet another aggravation. I
        do not see the list in WLC 151 as exhaustive.

        All other things being equal, I would consider homosexual
        immorality to be more heinous than heterosexual immorality
        on account of the way it further warps God's creational norm
        for sex. As in WLC 151, it goes against the “light of nature.”
        Romans 1 notes it is unnatural.

SJC 14. In your Revoice Breakout Session you said “And other people have a
calling to glorify God with unwanted same sex attraction or gender dysphoria
or intersex condition. And that calling, because it’s a calling from God to
suffer, is a holy calling and a holy vocation.” Further, you compare these
situations to one who is in an empty marriage and one who has leukemia.
(ROC 464). Whatever your answer, what is the Biblical or Confessional basis
for designating this as a calling or vocation?

       If I thought for a moment that my struggle with same-sex
      attraction was a random experience, bad luck, something
      outside of my heavenly Father's care, I would have no hope. It
      is because it is a calling from my Father that I can follow his
      wise instruction and trust and obey him through this calling. ...

      To be perfectly clear, I was not saying that sin is a holy calling,
      but that the life-long struggle against a particular indwelling sin
      on account of a fallen sexual orientation—and enduring the
      suffering that results from that—is a holy calling. I didn't have
                                      766
                                 APPENDIX T



      to spell that out because my audience were Christian leaders at
      a conference that for Christians who are same-sex attracted and
      committed to the biblical sexual ethic.

SJC 17. (#25 of the Questions the SJC sent down, because some of the
questions had multiple parts.) Do you think any of your public statements have
upset the peace of the PCA, and if so, do you have any thoughts on how you
might restore peace to our denomination?

      Certainly, in addition to what I mentioned above, there have
      been some posts or comments in social media that I regretted. I
      either deleted them and apologized, or I kept them up with an
      added apology and clarification. As I said above, I will continue
      to work with my presbytery in seeking their wisdom as to how
      and where I should issue further apologies and clarifications. I
      want nothing more than the purity and peace of the PCA.

Conclusion

         Based on the Record, there was no reversible error in the decisions
reached by Missouri Presbytery regarding the four allegations. It was not
unreasonable for Presbytery to judge that TE Johnson’s “explanations” on
the four allegations were “satisfactory.” (BCO 31-2).

        The SJC approved the decision on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Dissent        M. Duncan Dissent            Neikirk Concur
      Bise Dissent           S. Duncan Dissent            Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Concur                 Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur         Greco Dissent                Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur         Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur          Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur         Lucas Absent                 White Dissent
      Dowling Dissent        McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (16-7-0)




                                     767
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                Concurring Opinion
                               of RE Howie Donahoe

I concurred with the SJC Decision but believe comment is warranted in five
areas:
    1. The Judgment of Charity
    2. 1 Corinthians 6:9-11
    3. Complaints against Non-Indictments
    4. 47th GA’s AIC Report on Sexuality
    5. Reopening the Record

1. The Judgement of Charity - BCO 14-7 stipulates, “... Judicial decisions
... may be appealed to in subsequent similar cases as to any principle which
may have been decided.” In 2010, by a vote of 19-1 the SJC decided an
important principle when it denied a similar complaint against a non-
indictment. Here’s an excerpt from the SJC Reasoning.

                Complainants hold that certain views expressed by [the
           minister who was not indicted], capable of a heterodox
           interpretation, must be so interpreted. But this violates the
           judgment of charity, that if a view can be interpreted in an
           orthodox fashion, it ought to be so interpreted until one is
           forced to do otherwise.
                Complainants hold that certain of [the minister’s] views
           imply heterodox doctrines, and therefore impute those
           doctrines to [the minister]. But this is a non sequitur as well.
           One cannot properly impute implications that are drawn from
           a position to a person who expressly denies the implication.
           For example, a disciple of Gordon Clark believed that John
           Gerstner’s failure to embrace supralapsarianism implied
           Arminianism. He was free to so believe, but it was utterly
           unjust for him to say that Gerstner was an Arminian when
           Gerstner expressly denied it and spent his ministry upholding
           the sovereignty of grace in the Gospel.
                Against this doubtful reasoning stand [the minister’s]
           express, specific, and unambiguous denials of heterodoxy and
           affirmations of orthodoxy. The only question, then, is with
           respect to [the minister’s] credibility.20 (Emphasis added.)

20
     Case 2010-04: TE Sartorius et al. v. Siouxlands. (M39GA, 2011 Virginia Beach, pp.
     578-83) Nine current SJC members concurred: TEs Chapell, Coffin, Greco, McGowan,
     and REs Carrell, S. Duncan, Neikirk, Terrell and White. (TE Dominic Aquila was
                                          768
                                    APPENDIX T



In his Complaint and Briefs, the Complainant repeatedly alleges what he
contends TE Johnson believes, rather than providing reasonable-length quotes
from the accused to corroborate those contentions - especially when the
accused denies the implications the Complainant imputes. The Complaint
never quotes even one complete sentence of TE Johnson’s, and the 10-page
Preliminary Brief only quotes one complete sentence. This is quite stunning,
given that the accusations allege sinful views and statements. The
Complainant repeatedly makes assertions like, “Johnson believes ...,” and
“Johnson affirms ...,” without providing evidentiary excerpts.21 In the
concluding paragraph of his Preliminary Brief, the Complainant asks the SJC
to “find a strong presumption of guilt against TE Greg Johnson for his stated
views on human sexuality...” But instead of quoting examples of the allegedly
unbiblical stated views, the Complainant asserts what he contends are TE
Johnson’s views (occasionally providing some snippets from quotes) and then
argues why those constructions are problematic.

2. 1 Corinthians 6:9-11 - The Complainant seems to misinterpret or
   misapply this passage.
         9
           Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the
         kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually
         immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice
         homosexuality,10 nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards,
         nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God.
         11
           And such were some of you. But you were washed, you
         were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord
         Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God. (ESV. Emphasis
         added.)


   on the SJC at the time and concurred. In this present Case, he served as the
   Complainant’s assistant in the complaint against the non-indictment of TE Johnson.)
21
    from the Complaint: [Johnson allegedly] “maintains, believes, draws, misplaces,
   appears, consistently affirms.”
   Preliminary Brief: [Johnson allegedly] “maintains, defines, seems to say, is seeking
   to, appears to have, affirms, views, claims, draws, equates, treats, holds, teaches,
   promotes,” etc.
   Addendum Brief: [Johnson allegedly] “denies, appeals to, defines, explains, states,
   emphasizes, denies, contrasts, means, has adopted, expresses, sees, refuses,
   responds, suggests,” etc.



                                         769
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



While the original Complaint does not cite 1 Cor. 6:9-11, it is cited a dozen
times in the Complainant’s Briefs. Yet those verses never appear as citations
in the 12,000-word Westminster Confession of Faith.22

The SJC’s Reasoning on Allegation 4 (regarding the alleged failure to be
“above reproach”) includes the following footnote on 1 Cor. 6, which seems
to emphasize a distinction the Complaint does not grant.

           At the Hearing, the Complainant indicated he questioned
           whether the ESV accurately translates 1 Cor. 6:9 when it uses
           the phrase, “men who practice homosexuality.” However, the
           footnote in the ESV indicates: “The two Greek terms
           translated by this phrase refer to the passive and active
           partners in consensual homosexual acts.”
                 In the 47th GA’s AIC Report on Sexuality, footnote 4 for
           Statement 1 reads as follows: “Paul coined the term
           arsenokoitai (1 Cor. 6:9; 1 Tim. 1:10) from the use of two
           related terms in the Septuagint version of Leviticus 18 and 20.
           The basic meaning is “man-bedders” or men who have sex
           with other men. ... The combination of arsenokoitai and
           malakoi, uniquely used in the New Testament in 1 Corinthians
           6:9, likely refers most directly—as per the ESV footnote—to
           the active and passive partners in consensual homosexual
           activity. For more extended discussion, see Chapter 5 in
           Kevin DeYoung, What Does the Bible Really Say About
           Homosexuality? (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2015).” (SJC
           Decision p. 23)

Contrast that to this excerpt from the Complainant’s Preliminary Brief, which
cites 1 Cor. 6:

           In contrast to those [non-sinful physiological] conditions,
           homosexuality is a violation of the seventh commandment and
           is always and only portrayed in Scripture as sinful (1 Cor. 6:9
           ...) ... [The Bible says] neither “effeminate, nor homosexuals…


22
      https://www.pcaac.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/WCFScriptureIndex.pdf Vs.
     10 is cited in part of LC 145, and vs. 11 in parts of LC 69, 75, 77, 161 & SC 32, but
     those parts don’t pertain much to assertions in the Complaint.


                                            770
                                 APPENDIX T



        will inherit the kingdom of God. Such were some of you”
        (1 Cor. 6:9-11, NASB).” (Brief, p. 6, lines 11 and 19.
        Emphasis added)

The Complainant does not seem to interpret 1 Cor. 6:9-11 as making any
significant distinction between unwanted homosexual temptations and
intentional homosexual lusts or actions.

Unwanted Temptations vs. Intentional Sinful Actions - Historically, whenever
the PCA has adopted statements related to homosexuality, it has always
expressed or at least clearly implied a significant distinction between unbidden
temptations and intentional sinful actions (lusting and behavior). Some
examples are shown below. These excerpts from GA statements or GA-
endorsed statements over the last four decades demonstrate it is tenuous for
anyone to maintain the PCA has changed its position on the important
distinction between unwanted temptations and intentional sinful thoughts and
actions. (Emphasis is added throughout.).

    1977 - Forty-four years ago, the 5th GA in Smyrna, GA adopted
    the following:

        That the 5th General Assembly of the PCA affirm the Biblical
        position for our denomination which states that: (1) The act
        of homosexuality is a sin according to God's Word; ... and (3)
        In light of the Biblical view of its sinfulness, a practicing
        homosexual continuing in this sin would not be a fit candidate
        for ordination or membership in the PCA. (M5GA, p. 67)

    1980 - Three years later, and two years before the RPCES joined the PCA,
    its study committee produced a report titled “Pastoral Care for the
    Repentant Homosexual,” and their Synod “commended [the paper] to
    sessions and congregations as an aid for their ministry to those struggling
    with homosexuality.” (158th GS Minutes, pp. 43-50). Below are excerpts.

        Romans 1:26 ff. zeroes in on homosexual practices as a major
        manifestation of sinful man’s attempt to distort the creator's
        intent. But homosexuality is not singled out as the worst of all
        manifestations of sin as we can see in Jesus’ indictment against
        the unbelief of Capernaum (Matt. 11:23). ...
             If he who once was involved in homosexuality is growing
        in grace to such an extent that he can “walk with exemplary
                                      771
               MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    piety before the flock” there ought not be any reason for a
    generalized exclusion from church office. Judgment must be
    made in individual cases by the session and/or presbytery,
    keeping in mind those aggravations that make some sins more
    heinous than others.

1993 - Twenty-eight years ago, the 21st GA in Columbia, SC adopted
Overture 16 from Potomac Presbytery and sent a letter to the US President,
titled, “Declaration of Conscience.” Below are excerpts. Note the repeated
use of the words “practice” or “behavior.”

    [W]e stand resolutely opposed to homosexual practice as
    incompatible with the temporal good of our nation and the
    eternal good of its people. ... Our categorical rejection of
    homosexual behavior as wrong and destructive cannot fairly
    be taken to mean that we have not extended ourselves or are
    unable to extend ourselves in compassion and courage to men
    and women in our society who are homosexual. ... Our
    American civil government has historically respected the
    family's primacy in such matters and has sought to nurture it.
    Any policy which legitimizes homosexual practice abandons
    this time-honored tradition. To conclude, while condemning
    homosexual practice, we affirm our duty to love and do good
    to all, even those who are pursuing this perversion. ... More
    profoundly, however, the truth is that those given over to
    homosexual practice will face the judgment of God. ... Our
    prayer is that you will stand against any and every pressure
    that would be brought to bear on your Administration by those
    who would legitimize homosexual practices. (M21GA, p. 129)

1996 - Three years later, a personal resolution to "Oppose Legalization of
Homosexual Marriages" was answered by the 24th GA in Ft. Lauderdale
“by (1) reference to previous actions of the General Assembly (e.g.,
M5GA, p. 67-8, M21GA, p.129 ff.) and (2) the following statement:

    We affirm the Bible's teaching that promotion of homosexual
    conduct and relationships by any society, including action by
    the governments to sanction and legitimize homosexual
    relationships by the legalization of homosexual marriages, is
    an abominable sin calling for God's judgment upon any such
    society (Lev. 18:22 and Rom. 1:18-32). ... (M24GA, p. 315)
                                 772
                                   APPENDIX T



      2021 - This year, at the 48th GA in St. Louis, the Overtures Committee
      voted 124-3 to recommend the GA “declare the Report of the Ad Interim
      Committee on Human Sexuality as a biblically faithful declaration and
      refer it to the Committee on Discipleship Ministries for inclusion and
      promotion among denominational teaching materials.” The GA adopted
      that recommendation by a large majority. Below are three examples of
      excerpts from the AIC Report pertaining to the difference between
      unwanted temptations and intentional sinful actions.
          Nevertheless, there is an important degree of moral difference
          between temptation to sin and giving in to sin, even when the
          temptation is itself an expressing of indwelling sin. While our
          goal is the weakening and lessening of internal temptations to sin,
          Christians should feel their greatest responsibility not for the fact
          that such temptations occur but for thoroughly and immediately
          fleeing and resisting the temptations when they arise. (Statement
          6 on Temptation, p. 9)

          We give thanks for penitent believers who, though they continue
          to struggle with same-sex attraction, are living lives of chastity
          and obedience. These brothers and sisters can serve as
          courageous examples of faith and faithfulness, as they pursue
          Christ with a long obedience in gospel dependence. (Statement
          12 on Repentance and Hope, p. 13)

          To feel a sinfully disordered sexual attraction (of any kind) is
          properly to be called sin—and all sin, “both original and actual”
          earns God’s wrath (WCF 6.6)—but it is significantly less heinous
          (using the language of the WLC 151) than any level of acting
          upon it in thought or deed. ... Our brothers and sisters who resist
          and repent of enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are
          powerful examples to us all of what this “daily mortification”
          looks like in “the best of believers.” We should be encouraged
          and challenged by their example and eager to join in fellowship
          with them for the mutual strengthening of our faith, hope, and
          love. (Essay on Confessional Foundations, p. 23) 23

Righteous v. Unrighteous Standing - In addition to the above, it is difficult to
see how 1 Cor. 6:9-11 has much application to the allegations in this Case. The

23
       PCA Statements at https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/studies/index.htmland
     bibliography of the AIC Report (p.48).

                                        773
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



main point of the passage is that, because of God’s act in regeneration and his
imputation of the justifying righteousness of Christ, the Corinthian believers
were no longer, in any sense, the unrighteous who will not enter the kingdom
of God. (See the comments in the ESV Study Bible on verse 11 summarizing
the objective realities of regeneration and faith.)

When Paul says in vs. 11, “And such were some of you,” he is not saying the
Corinthians no longer experience any of those temptations or might even
commit those sins. The passage is not addressing that question, at least not
directly. He is simply saying these sanctified and justified Corinthians were
once the unrighteous-who-will-not-inherit but are now the righteous-in-Christ-
who-will-inherit.

At the same time, it would be reasonable to think Paul expected that some of
the Corinthians Christians were still tempted to the sins described in vv. 9-10
and was at least implicitly warning them, and all Christians, to avoid a lifestyle
that could fairly be described in the terms of vv. 9-10. But here we’d need to
distinguish, say, between a greedy person—whose life is characterized by
unrepentant greedy lusts and greedy behavior—and a person who is tempted
to greedy thoughts but seeks to flee from them and repents of any greedy
thoughts and deeds soon thereafter. There is an important difference between
a man whose life is characterized by unrepentant and willful reviling speech
and a man who sometimes succumbs to the temptation to revile but repents
soon thereafter. Paul is not teaching that people who were once characterized
by reviling speech will never again speak in that way. Any fears or warnings
in this passage are predicated upon his clear statement about who all of them
are presently in Christ.24

3. Complaints Against Non-Indictments - Complaints against non-
indictments like this one pose many complications, and this is rarely the most
prudent course for an accuser who claims a person should be indicted. This
point was made 12 years ago in a Concurring Opinion joined by RE Sam

24
      In the AIC Report, the first section of the Bibliography was titled, “For Pastors and
     Sessions” and the AIC reported these were books that could “help pastors and
     sessions shepherd congregants who are dealing with same-sex attraction.” Each of
     the 12 books note a significant difference between a person whose life is
     characterized by sinful homosexual lusts and behavior and a person who is tempted
     to homosexual thoughts but seeks to flee from such thoughts and repents of any to
     which he succumbs. That is a distinction in 1 Cor. 6:9-11 that the Complaint does
     not seem to sufficiently recognize.

                                             774
                                     APPENDIX T



Duncan and TE Fred Greco in the Siouxlands Case mentioned on page 1.
Below are excerpts from that Concurrence.

                This Case ... demonstrates the difficulty a Higher Court
           faces when presented with a Complaint, which contends that a
           Lower Court erred in not finding a strong presumption of guilt
           pursuant to an investigation (BCO 31-2). ...
                We suggest that instead of filing a Complaint for the failure
           of a Court to find a strong presumption of guilt after a BCO 31-
           2 investigation, a clearer and better alternative is to commence
           the process under BCO 32-2, i.e., “[p]rocess against an
           offender shall not be commenced unless some person or
           persons undertake to make out the charge.”
                [W]e suggest that the better way in this Case, and other
           Cases where the views, beliefs, and practices of men are called
           into question, would be for the Party who is concerned about
           these views, beliefs, and practices to make such inquiries as are
           necessary and practical (cf. Matthew 18:15) to ascertain
           exactly what these views, beliefs, and practices are; then,
           assuming they are contrary to Scripture or our Constitution,
           formally file a “charge” pursuant to BCO 32-2 and 32-3. This
           procedure not only removes the question of whether a strong
           presumption of guilt exists (BCO 31-2), but also allows a Court
           to directly try the issue raised in the “charge.” (BCO 32-3)

Voluntary Prosecutors - I wasn’t on the SJC for the Siouxlands Case
referenced above, but I can agree with the excerpt from the Concurrence - to a
point. Deciding whether a matter warrants a trial should remain a matter of
discretion and judgment for the original court, and it shouldn’t be required to
indict a person every time someone “formally files a charge.” 25 Nevertheless,
in situations like the one described in the Duncan/Greco Concurrence, if a trial
is deemed the wisest course, the court should seriously consider appointing the
accuser as the “voluntary prosecutor” and placing the burden and
responsibility on him to prepare and prosecute the case, especially if it involves
one minister accusing another minister of theological error.


25
     See the Reasoning provided ten years ago in Overture 15 from Pacific NW
     Presbytery: “Amend 31-2 to Clarify What Needs to Be Investigated.” (M40GA,
     Louisville 2012, pp. 698-704)


                                         775
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         BCO 31-3. The original and only parties in a case of process
         are the accuser and the accused. The accuser is always the
         Presbyterian Church in America, whose honor and purity are
         to be maintained. The prosecutor, whether voluntary or
         appointed, is always the representative of the Church, and as
         such has all its rights in the case.

Very few presbyteries have experienced prosecutors, and if they do, it’s
unlikely he has hundreds of voluntary man-hours to dedicate to the task. It
would seem unfair in many instances for an accuser to expect someone else to
spend hundreds of hours preparing and prosecuting the accuser’s allegations.

Furthermore, there seems to be no jeopardy for someone who unsuccessfully
files a complaint against a non-indictment. Our present Case has consumed
thousands of man-hours at various levels in PCA courts (not to mention some
division and relational strain amongst brothers). What would dissuade others
from doing the same thing again in other situations? But if an accuser is made
the prosecutor, and fails to prove the offense at trial, he risks being censured.

         BCO 31-9. Every voluntary prosecutor shall be previously
         warned, that if he fail to show probable cause of the charges,
         he may himself be censured as a slanderer of the brethren.

So, in situations where someone very publicly accuses another person of sin,
and the accusation, if proven, would be sufficient to warrant a censure greater
than admonition, perhaps the first thing the court should say to the accuser is,
“Call your first witness.” 26 27

Problem with Amends - An additional problem with a complaint against a non-
indictment involves the limited and rather awkward remedies available to the
higher court in such cases. Below is the amends section of the BCO Chapter
on Complaints.


26
   A similar thing happened three years ago in Case 2016-11 Complaint of TE Michael
   Frazier v. Nashville, where the SJC unanimously denied a complaint against a non-
   indictment, but only after the Presbytery and the SJC had spent hundreds of man-
   hours on the Case. (M46GA, 2018 Atlanta, p. 500 ff.).
27
   We note that in a presbytery trial, BCO 31-2 presently requires the prosecutor to be
   a member of that court, but in judicial process before a session, the prosecutor can
   be any member of that church.

                                         776
                                     APPENDIX T



         BCO 43-10. The higher court has power, in its discretion, to
         annul the whole or any part of the action of a lower court
         against which complaint has been made, or to send the matter
         back to the lower court with instructions for a new hearing. If
         the higher court rules a lower court erred by not indicting
         someone, and the lower court refers the matter back to the
         higher court, it shall accept the reference if it is a doctrinal
         case or case of public scandal (see BCO 41-3).

If a higher court rules that a lower court erred by not indicting someone, and
remands it “with instructions for a new hearing,” it’s not reasonable to expect
the lower court to reverse itself and indict the person when the lower court was
nearly unanimous in the original non-indictment decision.28 Likewise, even if
the lower court subsequently conducts a trial, it’s not reasonable to expect a
conviction, absent some compelling new evidence or testimony.29

Assumption of Original Jurisdiction - A better solution might be a revision of
BCO 34-1. A revision like the one below might end the interpretive debates
on two parts of the current provision - “refuses to act” and “doctrinal cases or
cases of public scandal.” It would remove subjectivity.

         Possible Revision of 34-1. Process against a minister shall be
         entered before the Presbytery of which he is a member.
         However, if the Presbytery refuses to act in doctrinal cases or
         cases of public scandal and two if twenty-five percent (25%)
         of the other Presbyteries request the General Assembly to
         assume original jurisdiction (to first receive and initially hear
         and determine), the General Assembly shall do so.

Because such a revision would require the GA to wrest jurisdiction from the
presbytery regardless of what the presbytery may have done or decided, the
petitioning threshold would need to be appropriately high. For example, if it
were only 10% then merely 9 of 88 presbyteries could trigger it, and it might
become an annual event. The SJC is not designed to conduct investigations
and trials annually, nor would that be healthy for the denomination. If another
28
   Missouri’s votes declining to find strong presumption of guilt on the four charges
   were 44-1, 43-1, 41-2 and 41-6.
29
   See the SJC Decisions in Case 2009-06 Bordwine v. Pacific NW (a complaint against
   a non-indictment that the SJC sustained), and Case 2012-05 Hedman v. Pacific NW
   (a complaint against the subsequent trial acquittal - a complaint the SJC denied by a
   15-2 vote). (M38GA, 2010, pp. 208 ff. and M41GA, 2013, pp. 583 ff.)
                                          777
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



presbytery’s handling of allegations is so egregious and unreasonable, we
should expect at least 25% of the presbyteries (22 of 88) to send a simple, one-
sentence email to the PCA Stated Clerk saying: “In accord with BCO 34-1,
our Presbytery requests the GA (through its SJC) to assume original
jurisdiction over TE ___ on matters related to ____.” If there aren’t 22
presbyteries that believe this rare and extreme step should be taken, then the
PCA is evidently not sufficiently concerned to warrant wresting jurisdiction
away from a presbytery.

Thus, the 25% threshold seems a reasonable one. It’s not too high to be
unattainable and not too low to be prone to abuse, and it would likely be
acceptable to two-thirds of our presbyteries (though some would prefer it
lower, and some would prefer it higher.) 30

4. Excerpts from AIC Report on Sexuality - To support some of his
assertions, the Complainant cites excerpts from the 2020 AIC Report. TE
Johnson also provides AIC excerpts in support of some of his explanations and
answers. The Complainant usually cites from the first sections of the “Twelve
Statements” and TE Johnson often cites from the second sections, i.e., the
“Nevertheless” sections. 31

Below are excerpts from the AIC Report that closely pertain to the subject
matter of the four allegations, which seem to harmonize with TE Johnson’s
explanations and answers. While nothing from the AIC Report was proposed
for GA adoption, the 2021 GA in St. Louis, by an overwhelming majority,
judged it to be a “biblically faithful declaration” and commended it to
Presbyteries and Sessions.

         Statement 6 (Temptation) ... Nevertheless ... We can avoid
         “entering into” temptation by refusing to internally ponder and
         entertain the proposal and desire to actual sin. Without some
         distinction between (1) the illicit temptations that arise in us
30
   The author of this Concurrence has twice drafted Overtures proposing revisions to
   BCO 34-1, in 2009 and 2012, but both were unsuccessful. For a comprehensive
   Legislative and Judicial History of BCO 34-1, see this link to Google Drive:
   https://drive.google.com/file/d/1UfhfQLFmtvuaWyYADQmgZafv2RMQUWps/vi
   ew
31
   The Record contains this statement from TE Johnson: “... I have no disagreement
    with the underlying theological or moral structure of the entire [AIC] report. The
    concerns I will voice will be pastoral and missiological in nature.” (Response to
    SJC Question 6.b in Allegation 2. See also SJC Questions 6c, 8a, 8c, 10 and 11.)
                                         778
                          APPENDIX T



due to original sin and (2) the willful giving over to actual sin,
Christians will be too discouraged to “make every effort” at
growth in godliness and will feel like failures in their necessary
efforts to be holy as God is holy (2 Peter 1:5-7; 1 Peter 1:14-
16). God is pleased with our sincere obedience, even though it
may be accompanied with many weaknesses and imperfections
(WCF 16.6). (Report p. 9)

Statement 7 (Sanctification) ... Nevertheless ... The aim of
sanctification in one's sexual life cannot be reduced to
attraction to persons of the opposite sex (though some persons
may experience movement in this direction), but rather
involves growing in grace and perfecting holiness in the fear
of God (WCF 13.3). (p. 10)

Statement 9 (Identity) Nevertheless ... There is a difference
between speaking about a phenomenological facet of a
person’s sin-stained reality and employing the language of
sinful desires as a personal identity marker. That is, we name
our sins, but are not named by them. (p. 11)

Statement 10 (Language) ... Nevertheless, we recognize that
some Christians may use the term “gay” in an effort to be more
readily understood by non-Christians. The word “gay” is
common in our culture, and we do not think it wise for
churches to police every use of the term. Our burden is that we
do not justify our sin struggles by affixing them to our identity
as Christians. Churches should be gentle, patient, and
intentional with believers who call themselves “gay
Christians,” encouraging them, as part of the process of
sanctification, to leave behind identification language rooted
in sinful desires, to live chaste lives, to refrain from entering
into temptation, and to mortify their sinful desires. (p. 12)

Essay 1: Confessional Foundations Regarding Nature of
Temptation, Sin and Repentance

    II.B.1. The Common Dynamic of Concupiscence - First,
    the dynamic of spontaneous sinful desire or attraction is
    not unique to those who experience homosexual desire. All
    people experience it. It is an essential point in the
                              779
       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Confession that all of us who are descended from Adam
and Eve experience their corrupted nature and the complex
of disordered affections, desires, and attractions that come
with that corruption. The danger of this question arising in
the context of the discussion of homosexuality is that some
might be tempted to think of that particular example of
disordered desire as qualitatively different from their own.
Or worse, some may be willing to assert the sinfulness of
one category of spontaneous desire but minimize or remain
largely ignorant of the sinful concupiscence that is
common to all.
    The truth is that if we think humbly and carefully about
our own spontaneous thoughts, feelings, and desires, we
would recognize that we are all much more alike than
different. ... Good Reformed teaching on sin places us all
on equal footing in our need of Christ’s imputed
righteousness. (p. 21)

II.B.2. Continued Corruption - Second, according to the
system of the Westminster Confession of Faith, we should
not be surprised, but rather expect that concupiscence in
general, and specific instances like homosexual attraction,
would continue in the life of a believer. ... This
acknowledgement of the remnants of corruption in
believers does not negate the call to fight against that
corruption; our endeavor to oppose and put to death what
is earthly in us (Col.3:5) demands a commitment to fight
all of our sin. However, to teach that our sinful corruption
must be entirely removed from any part of us in order to
be considered truly repentant is a spiritually treacherous
perversion of the doctrine of repentance. (p. 21)

II.B.5. Moral Difference - Finally, we can discern a very
practical value to the distinction between the sin that is
constituted by our “corruption of nature…and all the
motions thereof” and the “actual transgressions” that
proceed from it. ... To feel a sinfully disordered sexual
attraction (of any kind) is properly to be called sin—and
all sin, “both original and actual” earns God’s wrath (WCF
6.6)—but it is significantly less heinous (using the
language of the WLC 151) than any level of acting upon it
in thought or deed. ...
                         780
                                     APPENDIX T



                    Our brothers and sisters who resist and repent of
               enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are powerful
               examples to us all of what this “daily mortification” looks
               like in “the best of believers.” We should be encouraged
               and challenged by their example and eager to join in
               fellowship with them for the mutual strengthening of our
               faith, hope, and love. (p. 23)

           Essay 2: Biblical Perspectives for Pastoral Care - Discipleship,
           Identity and Terminology

               How then should we think of the language of sexual
               orientation? Insofar as the term orientation is used
               descriptively to articulate a particular set of experiences,
               namely the persistent and predominant sexual attractions
               of an individual, it can remain useful as a way of
               classifying those experiences in contrast to the experiences
               of the majority of other people. However, insofar as the
               term orientation carries with it a set of assumptions about
               the nature of that experience that is unbiblical (e.g.,
               overemphasized rigidity, its normativity, etc.), then the
               terminology may require qualification or even rejection in
               some circumstances. (p. 30)

               Singleness, Friendship, Community - Insofar as such
               persons display the requisite Christian maturity, we do not
               consider this sin struggle automatically to disqualify
               someone for leadership in the church (1 Cor 6:9-11, 1 Tim
               3:1-7, Titus 1:6-9; 2 Pet 1:3-11) (p. 31) 32

5. Reopening the Record - For two reasons, I abstained from the SJC’s
March 25, 2021, post-Hearing vote to consider reopening the Record and
sending 25 questions to Missouri. First, I judged that the Record already
demonstrated sufficiently that Missouri had not clearly erred in its decisions
declining to indict. But I also abstained because the proposal seemed to
resemble a quasi-assumption-of-original-jurisdiction and the post-assumption
investigatory step of SJC Manual 16.1.a. I’m confidently hopeful this
procedure won’t become a common occurrence.


32
     The AIC Report is at https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-
      48th-GA-5-28-20-1.pdf

                                          781
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Regardless, I think it should be clear to the impartial reader that the views
expressed in the accused minister’s answers to the SJC questions are not
fundamentally different from the views expressed in his answers to the
questions posed by Missouri’s investigating committee. And it’s worth noting
that the accused minister was under no constitutional obligation to answer any
of the questions. (BCO 35-1) In addition, it seems unreasonable for anyone to
object to the SJC question-sending if they also supported the BCO 34-1
assumption-of-original-jurisdiction petitions from Central Georgia, Savannah
River, and SE Alabama, which asked the SJC to institute a process that most
likely would begin with similar interrogatories — but ones drafted by a smaller
three-judge SJC Panel whose members would have been drawn by lot.
(OMSJC 16.1.a and RAO 17.3)

Moreover, the process by which the questions were selected was prudent and
fair. The Minutes of the SJC’s meeting on April 30, 2021, record: “The
Commission expressed its gratitude to the Committee members (Waters,
Donahoe, Dowling, Bise, Chapell, Kooistra) for their thorough and meticulous
work in compiling, refining and reporting the questions and recommendations.”
I’m confident the six-judge Committee would have included additional
questions above the 25 if any of the six members had said it was important to
them. Likewise, I’m confident the SJC would have included additional
questions if any SJC member had said it was important to them as well.
Finally, in my opinion it would be inaccurate to interpret the vote to send
questions to Missouri to mean that the SJC majority had concerns about how
Missouri conducted its investigation. On the contrary, in judging Issue 1 in this
Case, the SJC explicitly ruled Missouri did not violate BCO 31-2 in the manner
of its investigation of the allegations.33


33
     The SJC questioning in this Case was a slightly different procedure than in a similar
      one in June 2015. In Case 2014-01: TEs Aven & Dively v. Ohio Valley, the SJC
      ruled by a vote of 15-0: “The Complaint is neither Sustained nor Denied. The
      Commission cannot render judgment because the Record is insufficient regarding
      this minister’s particular expression of his view. Therefore, the Commission sends
      the matter back to OVP to hear further from [the minister] regarding his stated
      difference in order to create a more comprehensive Record.” The SJC supplied
      questions. (M44GA, 2016, p. 499). Sixteen months later, the SJC denied a follow-
      on complaint in Case 2016-01: Aven v. Ohio Valley, stating the following Issue and
      Judgment: “Did Presbytery fail to comply with the directive from the SJC’s
      Decision in Case 2014-01 to “hear further” from the minister regarding his view?
      No.” (M45GA, 2017, p. 496) The SJC judged that TE Aven had not complained
      against the answers provided in the accused minister’s nine-page document, which
      responded to the SJC-suggested questions.

                                            782
                                  APPENDIX T



TE David Coffin joins in Parts 1, 2 and 4 of the above concurring opinion.


                        Concurring Opinion of
                RE Frederick Neikirk and TE Guy Waters

While we concur with the decision of the Standing Judicial Commission in
case 2020-12, we feel compelled to offer the following additional comments,
both by way of clarification and explanation. Our comments fall into three
sections: why we could not conclude that Missouri Presbytery should have
found that there was a “strong presumption of guilt” regarding TE Johnson;
concerns regarding the use of BCO 31-2 to address alleged doctrinal errors;
and ongoing concerns about some of TE Johnson’s views.

I. Why We Could Not Conclude that Missouri Presbytery Should Have
   Found a “Strong Presumption of Guilt”

The SJC’s decision in this case should not be read as a defense or affirmation
of every statement or even every particular view of TE Johnson. That is not
the role of the appellate court, particularly in a case arising out of a complaint
that Presbytery failed to proceed to an indictment following a BCO 31-2
investigation. Further, we want to underscore, at the outset of our Concurring
Opinion, the structure and conclusions of the SJC’s Opinion. That opinion
repeatedly states that if the statements alleged in the Complaint were an
accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, then the Complaint would need to
be sustained. The SJC found, however, based on the Record, that it was “not
unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not hold these
positions.” As a result, the SJC could not sustain the Complaint.

We wish to elaborate on that conclusion. For this Complaint to be sustained
there would have had to have been a finding either that Presbytery somehow
failed properly to conduct the BCO 31-2 investigation or that said investigation
demonstrated “a strong presumption of guilt” but that Presbytery failed to take
the next step by indicting TE Johnson.

The BCO does not specify any particular set of procedures that a court must
follow in conducting a 31-2 investigation. Thus, lower courts have a great deal
of latitude in how they proceed in this area. While we are not persuaded that
the production of a large Record (over a thousand pages) is necessarily
evidence that the lower court has done a good investigation, and while we
might have wished that Presbytery had delved more deeply into some of TE

                                       783
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Johnson’s views, we cannot say that the Record demonstrates that Presbytery
committed any “clear error” (BCO 39-3(2,3)) in how it conducted its
investigation.

Of greater import here is how we are to understand “strong presumption of
guilt.” Aside from minor stylistic changes, the language of BCO 31-2 dates
back to the PCUS Book of Church Order of 1879. In discussing this provision
in his 1898 work Exposition of the Book of Church Order, F.P. Ramsay offers
this explanation of “strong presumption of guilt”: “A strong presumption
means a belief by the members of the court that evidence as then known to
them would indicate that guilt probably exists, unless evidence to the contrary
can be produced not then known to them.”34 In other words, to conclude that
Missouri Presbytery erred, one would have to show that there is evidence in
the Record that would demonstrate that it is likely that TE Johnson would be
convicted at a trial unless new, exculpatory evidence were provided. We agree
that the material provided in the Record does not meet this test.

As the SJC’s opinion demonstrates, some of the problematic comments that
TE Johnson had made were subsequently clarified or qualified (see below our
discussion in Part III). Further, in several cases, views that Complainant
alleged TE Johnson to hold were not supported by the Record. In particular,
there is no evidence in the Record that TE Johnson has made some of the
statements that Complainant found most problematic, and, in some instances,
the Record shows that TE Johnson explicitly denies ever having made the
comments (e.g., he avows that he does not use and has not used the “couplet”
“gay Christian” to identify himself). (ROC 975, 1029; SJC Opinion 18).
Additionally, in some cases the allegations Complainant raised about TE
Johnson’s views were apparently based on implications Complainant argued
must underlie or follow from things TE Johnson has said or not said. This was
particularly evident when the Complainant argued that TE Johnson’s failure to
answer adequately (in the view of the Complainant) a question about identity
must mean that TE Johnson does not recognize his identity as being in Christ
(ROC 5-6). It was also evident in Complainant’s conclusion that TE Johnson’s
cancer analogy (which we agree was ill-chosen) must mean that TE Johnson
believes same-sex attraction is genetic and ordinarily as incurable as cancer
34
     For the history of BCO 31-2 see the relevant section of the PCA Historical Center’s
     The Historical Development of the Book of Church Order, available at
     https://www.pcahistory.org/bco/rod/31/02.html. The Ramsay quote is included in
     that section. It is originally from F(ranklin) P(ierce) Ramsay, An Exposition of the
     Form of Government and Rules of Discipline of the Presbyterian Church in the
     United States (Richmond, VA: Presbyterian Committee of Publications, 1898), 187.
                                            784
                                    APPENDIX T



which must lead, in turn, to “the inexorable conclusion that someone who is
same-sex attracted is not responsible for his genetic condition” (ROC 3). By
any reasonable understanding of an appropriate judgment of charity we cannot
impute to a speaker implications that he denies unless there is no other
reasonable understanding of the statements in question, and this is particularly
true here given that the Record shows that TE Johnson denies the conclusions
Complainant drew (SJC Opinion 14-15).35

All this is not to say that we do not have ongoing concerns with some of TE
Johnson’s views and formulations. We do (see Part III). Indeed, Missouri
Presbytery recognized that, at a minimum, TE Johnson has not always been as
careful as he needed to be in how he has expressed some of his views (ROC
1003, 1004), and we agree with that assessment. But, having concerns about
a man’s views is very different from a conclusion that there is a “strong
presumption of guilt,” and that Presbytery erred by not reaching that
conclusion and thus in not proceeding to indict TE Johnson. Our concerns
notwithstanding, we cannot conclude that Presbytery should have found, from
the Record (which is all we are allowed to consider in reviewing a Complaint
(RAO 17.1(4)), that TE Johnson would likely have been convicted had a trial
been held before an impartial presbytery.

II Concerns Regarding the Use of BCO 31-2 to Address Alleged
Doctrinal Errors

In recent years we have seen several instances of efforts to use BCO 31-2 to
address alleged doctrinal errors. By its very nature a 31-2 investigation is
unlikely to develop a complete, fully documented Record. That, in turn, makes
review by a higher court difficult, particularly in doctrinal matters. This case
illustrates some of those difficulties.36

35
    The SJC has previously underscored the importance of applying a reasonable
   judgment of charity when drawing conclusions based on implications that one might
   conclude follow from an individual’s statements. See Case 2010-04: TE Art
   Sartorius et al. v. Siouxlands Presbytery (M39GA, 2011, pp. 578-83), esp. p. 582.
36
   We recognize that Allegations 2 and 4 in the Complaint focused, at least in large
   part, on TE Johnson’s fitness for office (character) given his admission that he is
   tempted by same sex attraction. We leave it to the Opinion of the SJC and the
   Report of the PCA General Assembly’s Ad Interim Committee on
   Human Sexuality to address the question of whether one tempted by (but not
   acting on) same sex attraction is automatically disqualified from office in the
   PCA. Our concern here is to highlight the problems of seeking to address the
   related doctrinal issues via the 31-2 process.

                                         785
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



First, there is no requirement for the transcription of testimony in a 31-2
investigation. Thus, in this case, at some key points, the Record provided only
summaries of TE Johnson’s views as understood by an investigating
committee, rather than a transcript of TE Johnson’s actual statements. Second,
there is no requirement that witnesses be cross-examined in a 31-2
investigation. This risks a less critical engagement of a man and his views
than would be afforded in a trial. In our judgment, that happened at some
points in this case. Third, the gathering of evidence is typically less exacting
in a 31-2 investigation than would be the case in a trial. That means, as was
true in this matter, that there may well be material in the Record that does not
bear directly on the matter at hand, or that key evidence may not be included
because there is no one charged with gathering all the evidence as would be
the case if there were a prosecutor. Fourth, since the 31-2 process is focused
on investigation and information gathering, evidence may not be developed
and presented in the systematic way that one would hope would occur in the
context of a trial. That was certainly true in this case and, at times, it made it
difficult for the appellate court to follow the reasoning that underlaid TE
Johnson’s views and the reasoning of the one(s) who have concerns.

None of these comments are intended to argue that Missouri Presbytery erred
in its findings, although we could certainly wish that they had probed some
key aspects of TE Johnson’s views more deeply at some points. It is simply
to point out the difficulties that come with trying to address doctrinal concerns
through a 31-2 investigation.37 Given those concerns, it is our conviction that
doctrinal cases, such as this one, generally are better handled by concerned
parties bringing charges against the individual about whose views there is
concern, rather than seeking a 31-2 investigation or bringing a Complaint
about the outcome of such an investigation.

III. Ongoing Concerns about Some of TE Johnson’s Views.

The SJC has found that Missouri Presbytery did not “clearly err at its meeting
on July 21, 2020, when it declined to commence process on” several
allegations that were brought against TE Greg Johnson. As we noted above in
Part I, the SJC’s Reasoning in support of its Judgment should not be read as a
37
     Indeed, it is not clear that 31-2 is even intended to be a mechanism for getting at
     doctrinal issues. Note that what is required is that “They [Sessions and Presbyteries]
     shall with due diligence and great discretion demand from such persons satisfactory
     explanations concerning reports affecting their Christian character.” That language
     suggests that 31-2 is intended primarily for “character related issues” rather than
     issues related to doctrine.
                                             786
                                  APPENDIX T



defense or vindication of TE Johnson or any of his statements or views. This
is because defending or vindicating TE Johnson is not the role of the appellate
court. The SJC, rather, found that Presbytery was not unreasonable in its
decisions declining to indict. The statements of TE Johnson that were extracted
from the Record of the Case, collated, and included in the Reasoning afford
warrant for that particular finding.

At the same time, as those who concur in SJC’s Decision, we wish, for the
sake of conscience and for the good of the broader church, to register concerns
raised by certain statements of TE Johnson that appear in the record. TE
Johnson has not been as careful as he ought to have been in expressing his
views – an exhortation that Missouri Presbytery has formally conveyed to TE
Johnson (ROC 1003, 1004). In particular, he has not given proper attention to
how his expressions would be heard and received in the broader church. We
offer three examples.

First, TE Johnson has spoken of his same-sex attraction and identity in ways
that have unsettled and alarmed the church. In a public address, reflecting on
his life before and after his conversion, Johnson states, “it’s not my sexual
orientation that’s changed; its’s my life orientation, because Jesus rescued me,
a sinner…” (ROC 555). In the same address, he refers to himself in the present
as “gay” – “gay people excel in every field, driven by a never-ending need to
accomplish enough, be successful enough, in order to become lovable. We
decorate our lives to poster over our shame in the hope that we’ll become
lovable” (ROC 556). Similarly, in a 2019 article for Christianity Today, TE
Johnson states, “Jesus hasn’t made me straight. But he covers over my shame.
Jesus really loves gay people” (ROC 904).

And yet, TE Johnson also speaks of his same-sex attraction and identity in
more qualified and guarded fashion. The Record testifies to TE Johnson’s clear
and longstanding refusal to speak of himself using the couplet “gay Christian”
(ROC 812). TE Johnson no less disavows celebrating “fallen sexuality” and
“sin-identity” (ROC 939, 829). He denies that any “Christian should have a
fallen sexual orientation as their core identity [that is,] the core identity that
defines me, the identity that then becomes what I aspire more fully to be.”
Rather, “our core identity as Christians is that we have been adopted as sons
of [the] Father into his family” (ROC 936). In response to a question put to
him by the SJC, TE Johnson affirms that same-sex attraction is sinful (ROC
1023). In response to another SJC question, TE Johnson affirms that
“homosexual immorality [is] more heinous than heterosexual immorality…”
(ROC 1041).
                                       787
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The language that TE Johnson has publicly employed to express his same-sex
attraction and identity, however, fails adequately to convey these beliefs to his
audiences, particularly Christian audiences. In fact, given the way that such
terms are used within our culture at large, to speak of himself as “gay” or to
affirm that his “orientation” has “not … changed,” without immediate
qualifiers, risks communicating to the Church what TE Johnson declares is not
true about his same-sex attraction and identity. Even so, at one point in the
Record, TE Johnson speaks dismissively about this concern – “And sometimes
religious people get really worked up about what terminology you use to
describe your fallen life orientation” (ROC 555). The Record therefore not
only indicates that TE Johnson speaks of himself in ways that have troubled
and disturbed the church, but also evidences a tone-deafness on the part of TE
Johnson about how his public self-descriptions are being understood and
received within the Church.38

Second, TE Johnson has drawn an analogy between same-sex attraction and
physical illness in such a way as to unsettle and alarm the church. In his floor
speech before the 2019 General Assembly, TE Johnson said the following:

            We don’t tell alcoholics it’s a sin to conceive of yourself as an
            alcoholic because drunkenness is a sin …. We don’t tell
            paraplegics that they should conceive of themselves as able-
            bodied because that’s God’s ideal. We wouldn’t tell an infertile
            woman that she needs to conceive of herself as fertile, and
            she’s unbelieving to conceive of herself as infertile because
            that’s not God’s design. Friends, I’m fallen, I’m broken, and
            Jesus has washed me and saved me (ROC 556).

In these remarks, TE Johnson establishes an analogy between alcoholism,
paraplegia, infertility, and his own same-sex attraction. TE Johnson draws
comparable analogies in at least two other places in the Record – “[T]he
biblical term [for identity] would be calling or vocation. We all have a calling.
And for some that calling is to glorify God in a really difficult, empty feeling

38
     We may note the parallel but distinct ways in which TE Johnson may speak of a
     person who has not entertained pornography for 15 years as a pornography “addict”
     (ROC 568), and a person who “has been sober for 18 years – hasn’t had a drink in
     18 years” as “absolutely an alcoholic “(ROC 565). What TE Johnson means by
     “addict” and “alcoholic” is that this particular sin is “part of [this person’s] story,”
     though not something that he “identif[ies]” with in the sense of “bow[ing] down to
     it” (ROC 565). But the effect of using these terms in such a way is inevitably to
     shock and disturb Christian audiences.
                                              788
                                  APPENDIX T



marriage. For some, it’s to glorify God when they have cancer. For some, it’s
to glorify God with same-sex attraction – unwanted same-sex attraction” (ROC
566); “Some people have a vocation to glorify God with a really empty
marriage that is a real struggle, but their calling is to glorify God with that.
Other people have a calling to glorify God with leukemia. And other people
have a calling to glorify God with unwanted same-sex attraction or gender
dysphoria or intersex condition” (ROC 464).

The Record testifies that, when asked by his Presbytery to explain his meaning,
TE Johnson says paraplegia, infertility, cancer, and same-sex attraction were
“similar in their being effects of the fall that cause suffering,” but “dissimilar
in terms of moral status” (ROC 961). He expressly declared to his Presbytery
that “same-sex attraction is different from these others in that it is not morally
neutral” (ROC 961-2). He says that “in my GA floor speech, I was not claiming
moral neutrality for same-sex attraction any more than I was for alcoholism.
That was not the point of my comparison” (ROC 962). TE Johnson later
declared that “sadly what many heard was a moral comparison. They
misunderstood me to be stating that same-sex attraction is morally neutral like
paraplegia and infertility. As I stated to my presbytery on June 14, 2020, ‘I
regret not qualifying my analogy during my floor speech. I had qualified that
analogy when I used it in the past and should have thought to do so at GA. I
neglected to do so then by oversight….’” (ROC 1042).

TE Johnson’s subsequent explanations are certainly welcome and clarifying.
Even so, as he acknowledges, the distinctions that he later employed to explain
his analogy in his floor speech could not have been evident from his words to
the Commissioners of the 2019 General Assembly. TE Johnson’s floor speech
surfaces prominently in the Record both in outside correspondence directed to
TE Johnson’s Presbytery and within subsequent investigations of TE Johnson.
This prominence indicates the degree to which TE Johnson’s unqualified
remarks had the effect of upsetting and disturbing the broader church.

Third, the way in which TE Johnson has spoken of change in the Christian
life has needlessly troubled the broader Church. In response to a concern raised
by Central Georgia Presbytery alleging TE Johnson’s belief “that those who
experience same-sex temptations are not normally delivered from these, and
are not normally changed in nature by the LORD” (ROC 801; compare the
letter of Grace and Peace PCA, Anna, TX, ROC 653-5), TE Johnson told his
own Presbytery, “God can do anything. He can do miracles. But the normal
pattern in this fallen world is that this is a lifelong struggle.” (ROC 943).


                                       789
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Elsewhere in the Record, Johnson states that “orientation generally does not
change. It’s very rare” (ROC 567; cf. ROC 813, 1057).

TE Johnson’s repeated emphasis upon the rarity of orientation change appears
related to a concern that he has expressed with respect to the expectations of
Christian audiences, “[religious people] want to make sure that I say I used to
be gay, implying God didn’t leave me there, implying that I’ve experienced
some level of sexual orientation change that has remained elusive for me and
for most of the believers who stand where I stand” (ROC 555). But this
emphasis upon the alleged rarity of orientation change has troubled the broader
Church. Whether or not TE Johnson is correct in his assessment of orientation
change is not our concern here. Our concern, rather, is that the vehemence of
TE Johnson’s denials of orientation change has rendered the broader Church
unsettled and uncertain with respect to TE Johnson’s commitment to
progressive sanctification, particularly the mortification of indwelling sin.

The Record indicates that, in response to questions put to him by the SJC, TE
Johnson declares his embrace of the Westminster Standards’ doctrine of
sanctification (ROC 1033-35). He stresses that “nothing I have stated has ever
been intended to suggest otherwise” than that “Jesus does change lives, and
that change is progressive” (ROC 1034). He furthermore qualifies his
statement “sexual orientation does not typically change” – “I am not saying
that God doesn’t change lives … All of these people [several persons whom
TE Johnson mentions in the material elided] are walking miracles and proof
of the gospel’s power to radically reorient a life to God. My point has been and
remains that none of this is evidence of a gay-to-straight cure” (ROC 1037,
emphasis original).

TE Johnson’s public statements about orientation change have not been
adequately framed to convey to his audiences the kinds of affirmations and
qualifications referenced in the previous paragraph. In other words, TE
Johnson has not shown proper concern for how his statements relating to
sanctification would be heard and received by the broader Church. In so
emphasizing his beliefs about the rarity of orientation change, he has generated
avoidable disturbance within the Church. Regrettably, the closing quotation in
the paragraph above suggests that TE Johnson does not yet fully apprehend
how his public statements about orientation change have been received within
and have troubled the Church.




                                      790
                                  APPENDIX T



IV. Conclusion

In conclusion, we want to be clear about what we are not saying and what we
are saying. We are not saying that the Church has merely misheard or
misunderstood TE Johnson. Neither are we saying that the concerns raised
before Missouri Presbytery by outside parties with respect to TE Johnson’s
public teaching were altogether unfounded. In fact, we ourselves have
registered above serious concerns about certain of TE Johnson’s public
statements insofar as those statements lack clarity and reflect a tone-deafness
with respect to the broader Church. But, as we stressed earlier, simply having
concerns about certain of TE Johnson’s public statements is not sufficient to
find a “strong presumption of guilt” (see our discussion in Part I). The reason
that we did not vote to sustain the Complaint is because the Record of the Case,
taken as a whole, contains TE Johnson’s subsequent clarifications or
qualifications, particularly those offered in the course of Missouri Presbytery’s
investigations and later confirmed in his answers to questions posed by the
SJC, of earlier, problematic statements. Based upon the totality of the evidence
within the Record of the Case, we do not believe that there is a “strong
presumption of guilt,” notwithstanding the concerns that we have registered
here about some of TE Johnson’s public statements. This concurring opinion
was written by RE Frederick (Jay) Neikirk and TE Guy Prentiss Waters and
joined by joined by RE Daniel A. Carrell, TE Bryan Chapell, TE David F.
Coffin, Jr, TE Hoochan Paul Lee, TE Michael F. Ross, and RE Jack Wilson
(as to Parts I, II, and IV of this opinion, but only as to portions of Part III).

                          DISSENTING OPINION
                          OF RE Samuel J. Duncan

The Standing Judicial Commission, in ruling that Missouri Presbytery did not
err in this case, found it was bound by the “great deference” standard in BCO
39-3 requiring a finding of “clear error.” I believe the Presbyterian Church in
America could benefit from a review of the civil/criminal and ecclesiastical
meanings of “clear error,” since many of our cases hinge on what “clear error”
is, or is not, and how much deference should be given to presbytery decisions
and actions.

When appellate courts, be they civil/criminal or ecclesiastical, decide cases
that are properly before them, the starting point for this appellate review is to
determine the correct “standard of review.” Historically, the “standard of
review” is the amount of deference given by a higher court in reviewing a
decision of a lower court.

                                      791
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



A low standard of review (very little deference given to the lower court
decision) means that the decision under review will be reversed if the higher
court considers there is any error at all in the lower court's decision. A high
standard of review (much deference given to the lower court decision) means
that more deference is accorded to the decision under review, so that it will not
be reversed just because the higher court might have decided the matter
differently; it will be reversed only if the higher court considers the decision
to have obvious error. The standard of review may be set by statute, rule or
precedent. Generally, there are different standards for reviewing questions of
fact and questions of law, with factual findings given more deference than
questions of law.

In considering civil/criminal appeals, there are several “standards of review:”

    1. Arbitrary and Capricious: This standard of review is employed when
an appellate court determines that a factual finding by a lower court should be
reversed because it was made on unreasonable grounds or without any proper
consideration of circumstances. This is an extremely deferential standard.

      2. Substantial Evidence: This standard of review is employed when a
factual finding is made by a jury and will be normally upheld on appeal, unless
it is not supported by "substantial evidence." This means something "more than
a mere scintilla" of evidence. It means such relevant evidence as a reasonable
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion. Under the "substantial
evidence" standard, appellate review extends to whether there is any relevant
evidence in the record which reasonably supports every material fact (that is,
material in the sense of establishing an essential element of a claim or defense).
Appellate courts will not reverse such findings of fact unless there is no
reasonable basis in the evidence submitted by the parties. If the parties
presented conflicting evidence at trial, appellate courts applying a "substantial
evidence" standard assume that the jury or finder of fact resolved the conflict
in favor of the prevailing party, and in turn, appellate courts must defer to such
implicit findings of fact about which side's witnesses or documents were more
believable, even if they suspect they might have ruled differently if hearing the
evidence themselves in the first instance. This is a highly deferential standard.

    3. Clearly Erroneous: This standard of review is employed when a trial
court (bench trial, without a jury – judge is the finder/trier of fact) makes a
finding of fact, which should not be reversed unless the appellate court is left
with a "definite and firm conviction” that an error in a factual finding has been
committed by the trial court. So if the appellate court finds that, although there
                                       792
                                   APPENDIX T



was evidence to support the lower court's factual finding, the evidence taken
as a whole—including the eyewitness and the expert testimony—leaves the
appellate court with a definite and firm conviction that an error was committed
by the trial court in finding that fact, then clear error is present. This is a very
deferential standard, but it is limited to factual findings, not the decisions upon
which those factual findings are based.

     4. De Novo: This standard of review is employed when an appellate
court considers a matter as a question of law, affording no deference to the
decisions below. Decisions of a lower court on questions of law are reviewed
using this standard. This standard of review allows the appellate court to
substitute its own judgment about whether the lower court correctly applied
the law. This is a very low deferential standard.

    5. Mixed Questions of Fact and Law: Lower court decisions containing
mixed questions of law and fact are usually subjected to de novo review, unless
factual issues predominate, in which event the decision will be subject to
clearly erroneous review.

    6. Abuse of Discretion: This standard of review is employed when a
lower court has made a discretionary ruling (such as whether to allow a party
claiming a hardship to file a brief after the deadline). This is a highly
deferential standard.

The issue of what “standard of review” should be used by higher ecclesiastical
courts when reviewing actions of lower ecclesiastical courts was presented to
the 24th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America in June,
1996 in the Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Judicial Procedure (the
“Report”). See 24th General Assembly, 1996, 24-17, p. 65)

The Report noted that “one of the more difficult problems facing the PCA has
been the question of how judicial cases should be handled by the Assembly”
and stated that “one of the central concerns” at the founding of the PCA “was
a failure of Church discipline.” The Report reminded the PCA, from the
“Message to All Churches” that “[w]hen a denomination will not exercise
discipline and its courts have become heterodox or disposed to tolerate error”
the minority will find itself having to be “submissive to a tolerant and erring
majority.” The “Message” declared that this development was the exercise of
discipline in reverse, making separation a necessity (and the eventual forming
of the PCA).


                                        793
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



In other words, and bringing this age old conflict to the present, a lower court’s
relaxed (tolerant) or refusal to biblically discipline its members must not be
protected from a higher court’s review by a highly deferential standard of
review.

The PCA’s initial practice of handling all judicial matters at the General
Assembly, and subsequently a standing judicial commission, whose decisions
were then approved by the General Assembly, proved to be impractical or
unsatisfactory, leading to the creation of this Ad Interim Committee, whose
recommendations, including a new “standard of review,” were adopted by the
PCA and made a part of the BCO, which now constitute our current practice.

Part C of the Report’s Recommendations covered “Standards for Review”
noting that the issue was a “need for a common standard of judicial review,
clearly reflecting Presbyterian constitutional principles, to guide the higher
courts in fulfilling their obligations under this chapter.” To address this need,
the following “standards of review” were adopted and made a part of BCO 39-
3:

        ….To insure that this Constitution is not amended, violated
        or disregarded in judicial process, any review of the
        judicial proceedings of a lower court by a higher court
        shall be guided by the following principles:
            1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should
                 limit itself to the issues raised by the parties to the
                 case in the original (lower) court. Further, the
                 higher court should resolve such issues by
                 applying the Constitution of the church, as
                 previously established through the constitutional
                 process.
            2. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
                 deference to a lower court regarding those factual
                 matters which the lower court is more competent
                 to determine, because of its proximity to the
                 events in question, and because of its personal
                 knowledge and observations of the parties and
                 witnesses involved. Therefore, a higher court
                 should not reverse a factual finding of a lower
                 court, unless there is clear error on the part of the
                 lower court.


                                        794
                                  APPENDIX T



            3. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
               deference to a lower court regarding those matters
               of discretion and judgment which can only be
               addressed by a court with familiar acquaintance of
               the events and parties. Such matters of discretion
               and judgment would include, but not be limited to:
               the moral character of candidates for sacred office,
               the appropriate censure to impose after a
               disciplinary trial, or judgment about the
               comparative credibility of conflicting witnesses.
               Therefore, a higher court should not reverse such
               a judgment by a lower court, unless there is clear
               error on the part of the lower court.
            4. The higher court does have the power and
               obligation of judicial review, which cannot be
               satisfied by always deferring to the findings of a
               lower court. Therefore, a higher court should not
               consider itself obliged to exhibit the same
               deference to a lower court when the issues being
               reviewed involve the interpretation of the
               Constitution of the Church. Regarding such issues,
               the higher court has the duty and authority to
               interpret and apply the Constitution of the Church
               according to its best abilities and understanding,
               regardless of the opinion of the lower court.

As grounds for this BCO amendment, the Report noted that this proposal
would “insure that in judicial review the Constitution actually functions as
intended, and is not amended, violated or disregarded in judicial process.
Further, clear standards of judicial review will help to preserve the
Constitutional graduation of authority while upholding each court’s rights and
responsibilities.” Unfortunately, at this time, I do not believe these “standards
of review” are as clear and properly applied as the drafters of this BCO
amendment had hoped.

When does this “clear error” standard apply? How is this “clear error”
standard applied? Does this “clear error” standard apply to every action or
decision of a lower court, or is this “clear error” standard of review limited to
the context of the trials of ordination, a trial/censure in a discipline case, or
quasi fact finding situations?


                                      795
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Surely a higher court is not expected to “rubber stamp” all actions of a lower
court. And cutting to the heart of the matter, should higher courts give this
“great deference” to all actions of a lower court, especially those actions
involving the question of whether or not a member should be disciplined?
Should a lower court’s failure or refusal to fully begin and complete the
discipline process be given just a cursory review, justified by a potential
misunderstanding of how the “clear error” standard of review should be
applied? No and No!

In BCO 39-3.2, the “clear error” standard applies to “factual matters,” because
the lower court is more familiar with the “parties” and “witnesses” than the
higher court. The reference to “parties” and “witnesses” would seem to make
this sub-section apply the “clear error” standard to factual findings from an
actual trial, as opposed to a non-trial action or decision. At an actual trial,
witnesses and evidence are presented that either fact “A” or fact “B” occurred.
When this court of original jurisdiction or initial trier of fact determines that
fact “B” is true, this is the type of “factual matter” to which the “clear error”
standard of review applies. In other words, the lower court’s factual finding
that fact “B” occurred should not be reversed without a ruling from the higher
court that finding fact “B” was “clear error.”

In BCO 39-3.3, the “clear error” standard applies to matters of “discretion and
judgment,” because the lower court is more familiar with the “events” and
“witnesses” than the higher court. Given examples of these matters of
discretion and judgment are: the “moral character of candidates for sacred
office, the appropriate censure to impose after a disciplinary trial, or judgment
about the comparative credibility of witnesses.” The reference to “events” and
“parties” would seem to describe situations in which a lower court determines
certain facts or makes decisions/takes actions after hearing conflicting
testimony, statements, arguments, or reports from more than one person.
The examples given relate to a lower court acting as an initial trier or finder of
certain facts and making decisions or taking actions based on those facts. First,
based on his testimony and answers to questions at his trials of ordination, a
candidate’s moral character is either acceptable or not. Second, the imposition
of a censure is obviously after a trial, or a confession, at which time certain
facts were either determined by the lower court after a trial or confessed by the
accused, and serve as the basis for a particular censure. Third, the credibility
of witnesses giving conflicting testimony could serve as a basis for finding that
one witness is more credible than the other.

When the court of original jurisdiction or the initial trier/finder of fact
determines that a candidate’s moral character is bad, or the censure of
                                       796
                                  APPENDIX T



deposition from office is warranted, or that witness “A” is more credible than
witness “B,” these are the types of matters of “discretion and judgment” to
which the “clear error” standard of review applies. In other words, the lower
court’s decision, after hearing a candidate’s answers to questions from the
floor, or what is an appropriate censure after a guilty verdict, or confession, or
conflicting statements from adversarial parties/witnesses, should not be
reversed without a ruling from the higher court that the decision rendered by
the lower court in the crucible of a disputed matter or quasi fact finding matter,
was “clear error.” While these types of “factual” determinations would be
subject to the “clear error” standard of review, it does not necessarily follow
that a lower court’s actions/decisions based on those facts would be subject to
the same “clear error” standard, especially in situations when the lower court’s
action/decision is not supported by those facts.

It should be noted that no examples are given in BCO 39-3.3 outside of
situations involving the trials of ordination, an actual trial (or confession), or
quasi fact finding matters involving the credibility of witnesses. Accordingly,
the “clear error” standard of review would not be applicable to a lower court’s
decisions/actions that do not arise from similar contexts. Therefore, the “clear
error” standard of review should not be applied to a decision/action of a lower
court finding that no strong presumption of guilt existed. The proper standard
of review in those situations would fall under BCO 39-03.4, which is basically
the de novo standard of review.

In conclusion, the “clear error” standard of review would be applicable to the
matters and situations set out above, but would not be applicable in situations
that did not involve some type of factual finding of a lower court following the
trials of ordination or an actual trial or confession or some action/decision of
a lower court that was not the result of a quasi-fact finding situation. This
dissenting opinion was written by RE Samuel J. Duncan and joined by RE
John Bise, RE Steve Dowling and RE John White.

                          DISSENTING OPINION
                           Of RE Steve Dowling

We respectfully dissent from the court’s ruling in this case on the following
grounds:

    1. That Presbytery did not exercise the “due diligence” required by BCO
       31-2 in its investigation and that it therefore committed “clear error”
       [BCO 39-3] in making its determinations;


                                       797
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    2. That the SJC was not bound by the “great deference” requirement of
       BCO 39-3 because this is a case centering on Constitutional
       interpretation; and
    3. That the substantive conclusions reached by Presbytery and confirmed
       by the SJC do not follow from the facts in the Record of the case.

The first two grounds are procedural, while the third is on the merits of the
case. Each of these grounds is important, and each error has significant
consequences for the denomination.

That Presbytery did not exercise the due diligence required by BCO 31-2
in its investigation and that it therefore committed clear error [BCO 39-
3] in its determinations

While this case is nuanced, it isn’t particularly complex and some parts of it
are simple. One of the easiest things to understand about it is that the SJC
went through most of the judicial process, including its final hearing with the
parties to the case, and then opened the record to get more information. Here
is the court’s reasoning for doing that:

        The SJC believes it is necessary to attempt to clarify the
        Record of the Case because its magnitude (over 600 pages
        covering multiple years of writing, speaking, and judicial
        processes) makes it difficult to ascertain if specific
        representations of perspectives of TE Johnson are his
        actual or present theological convictions.

The first thing to notice here is that the SJC says it sought further clarification
because the ROC was hard to understand. If the SJC -a group that is
reasonably expert in these kinds of processes and issues- cannot make enough
sense of the record to reach a conclusion, it’s difficult to see how Presbytery
understood it well enough to reach its conclusions. Further, the SJC had before
it not only everything Presbytery had before it as a court, but also additional
briefs, the benefit of a full hearing, and more oral examination of the parties.
Though we have no doubt about the fair motives of the court, it proved through
its actions that due diligence hadn’t been exercised by Presbytery. If it had
been, there could be no need to get clarification after a record had once been
declared judicially in order, a hearing held, and SJC deliberations begun.

It bears noting that the extent of this clarification was substantial. It wasn’t
just that there was a question or two about some specific point in the record,
                                       798
                                  APPENDIX T



but instead the apparent need for the SJC to form a committee to create
interrogatives, communicate them to the accused, and receive his responses.
This process resulted in 103 questions being submitted by members of the SJC.
From that catalog of questions, the committee chose 25 that it deemed the most
useful (through a blind grading process). TE Johnson answered the questions,
and these answers -over and against the contents of the original ROC- provide
much of the substance cited by the SJC in its support of Presbytery. For
example, Allegation #1 is denied with 7 citations, 6 of which are from SJC
questions. The denial of Allegation #2 is supported by 4 citations from the
original ROC, and 4 from the SJC’s additional questions. For Allegation #3,
the original ROC is cited once and the SJC’s questions are cited 7 times, and
the numbers for Allegation #4 are 4 from the original record and 4 from the
SJC.

The SJC’s supplemental work produced 67% of the citations used by it in
support of Presbytery’s conclusions, strongly suggesting that Presbytery’s
investigation was inadequate. If the investigation was inadequate, then
Presbytery’s conclusions constitute “clear error.”

The second thing to observe in the decision’s justification is that the SJC
wasn’t sure whether

        … specific representations of perspectives of TE Johnson
        are his actual or present theological convictions.

BCO Preliminary Principle 8 says this:

        Since ecclesiastical discipline must be purely moral or
        spiritual in its object, and not attended with any civil
        effects, it can derive no force whatever, but from its own
        justice, the approbation of an impartial public, and the
        countenance and blessing of the great Head of the Church.

It’s hard to conceive that an ‘impartial public’ would approve of seeking the
“present theological convictions” of an accused nearly two years after the
discrete incident resulting in a complaint occurred, particularly in the absence
of any effort to acquire contrary evidence. This extension of time to the present
and ex post facto acquisition of information on the part of the court appears to
be a misuse of judicial discretion, with the court having undertaken more of a
pseudo-BCO 31-2 investigation than an action to perfect the record. Since the
opportunity to answer questions two years after the fact was extended to TE
                                      799
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Johnson, then the door should have opened to evidence (if there is any) related
to his actions, social media utterances, and writings over the past two years
which might contradict the veracity of his carefully formulated responses.
Collecting evidence in that manner would be consistent with the desire for a
complete record rather than merely an expanded record.
Discussions of investigative balance aside, TE Johnson’s present positions are
irrelevant to the complaint against him. The actions of the court and TE
Speck’s subsequent complaint exist within a discrete timeframe that ended
with the initiation of the complaint. It’s a closed set of circumstances, and
subsequent events and information cannot properly be introduced.

In summary, the SJC’s actions bear testimony to the fact that Presbytery’s
investigation was inadequate, and since it was inadequate the subsequent
determinations made on that inadequate investigation were “clear error.”
Moreover, the SJC distorted the record -however unintentionally- by soliciting
the “present” views of TE Johnson.

That the SJC was not bound by the “great deference” requirement because
this is a case centering on Constitutional interpretation

There are limitations on courts of review in the PCA. BCO 39-3 enumerates
these, saying first that a higher court should limit itself in its decisions to issues
raised by the lower courts, and that higher courts shouldn’t overturn the
decisions of lower courts unless there is “clear error.” In applying these
limitations there are conditions and exceptions. For example, BCO 39-3.2
presupposes that the lower court’s proximity to the events in question better
qualifies it to judge a case, and BCO 39-3.3 presupposes better ability to judge
based on “familiar acquaintance” with events and parties. Putting aside the
obvious argument that familiarity may actually compromise a court’s
objectivity in some cases, BCO 39-3.4 establishes that:

         The higher court does have the power and obligation of
         judicial review, which cannot be satisfied by always
         deferring to the findings of a lower court. Therefore, a
         higher court should not consider itself obliged to exhibit
         the same deference to a lower court when the issues being
         reviewed involve the interpretation of the Constitution of
         the Church. Regarding such issues, the higher court has
         the duty and authority to interpret and apply the



                                         800
                                   APPENDIX T



        Constitution of the Church according to its best abilities
        and understanding, regardless of the opinion of the lower
        court.

The matter at hand is a doctrinal case requiring interpretation of the
Constitution of the Church and the SJC was not obliged to grant “great
deference” to the lower court. Moreover, the SJC had the duty to address the
issues raised in the complaint without dependence on the “great deference”
standard, but it conducted the case instead as if it were bound by the provisions
of BCO 39-3.2 and 3. While we respect the SJC’s unwillingness to exceed its
mandate, or to position itself as the arbiter of truth for the Assembly, this is an
abdication of responsibility with respect to BCO 39-3.4.

Further, by not meeting its obligation to interpret the constitution of the church
under BCO 39-3.4, the SJC has affirmed Presbytery’s authority to make
Constitutional and theological declarations on behalf of the denomination.
Since the decision made by Presbytery in declining to indict has been affirmed,
the SJC not only has reinforced the idea that this authority lies with individual
Presbyteries, it has also formalized a dubious Constitutional interpretation of
SSA and how it applies to ordination.

That the substantive conclusions reached by Presbytery and confirmed by
the SJC do not follow from the facts in the Record of the case

Again, while nuanced, this case only becomes complex when the things
pertaining to sexual dysphoria among Christians generally are made indistinct
from ordination requirements, and when the semantic ranges of terms used in
the discussion are narrowed, expanded, or otherwise changed according to
undiscernable criteria. In the first case, solid biblical arguments for the church
to embrace “sexual minorities” are extended to ordained service as if there
could be no category of sin, or no operative level of a specific type of sin, that
is a priori disqualifying. In the second, the symbols (or words) with which we
communicate are redefined without agreement, having been appropriated by
those with special knowledge of the distinctions they desire from the symbols.

For example, the word “homosexual” appears just under 2400 times in the
record for this case. In virtually all the places where it’s used the term is
semantically equivalent to “same sex attracted,” so there seems to be a high
correlation between the symbol and the thing signified in common usage, with
some translators using the word to translate arsenokoitai 1 Corinthians 6:7-9.
Even so, here is what TE Johnson says:
                                       801
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



          Neither malakoi or arsenokoitai map very tightly onto
        this modern use of gay or homosexual or same-sex
        attracted as an orientation.

He is saying that the biblical strictures are not closely aligned with the
“modern” use of the words as an “orientation,” but there is no biblical support
for arguing that the concepts in 1 Corinthians 6 are culturally bound. Pucci
provides some insight here:

        …the Muses sing a discourse similar to true things, but
        with some distortion, invention, or deflection -in a word,
        with some differences. The similarity vouches for the
        credibility of the discourse, while the invention, deflection,
        and difference make it false.

We mean by this that fine distinctions and novel interpretations may obfuscate
truth rather than illuminate it, and that the effort to more narrowly define
meaning can have the effect of removing meaning altogether, turning truth into
falsehood and vice-versa. In this case, TE Johnson’s reinterpretation of the
meanings of malakoi and arsenokoitai through a modern lens to make a
distinction related to “orientation” does little to clarify the issue from a biblical
standpoint.

The ROC is clear that TE Johnson identifies himself as a “same-sex attracted
man.” Irrespective of whether there’s a distinction between that and
“homosexual,” and whether or not malakoi and arsenokoitai “map tightly” to
the scriptures condemning homosexuality, TE Johnson provides enough
evidence from his own statements to make it obvious that this characteristic is
so core to his being and so central to his personal narrative that it disqualifies
him from ordained service.

TE Johnson’s testimony establishes that he has seen himself as same-sex
attracted since he was 11 years old. He says he has never had an attraction to
a woman and that he finds the idea of looking at a woman lustfully
“disgusting.” He says that his public ministry as a same-sex attracted man is
intended to help others who are suffering and ashamed about their own same-
sex attraction, and in his 2019 General Assembly speech, he claimed that
Article 7 of the Nashville Statement “hurt” because it asserts that it is a sin to
adopt a homosexual self-conception.



                                        802
                                   APPENDIX T



TE Johnson’s self-identification per se, then, is not a disputable issue; the real
question is whether this identification “compromises and dishonors” his
identity in Christ, and there is good reason to conclude that it does, because
TE Johnson consistently palliates the sin of same-sex attraction such that he
dishonors God. For example, he first appeals to the universality of sin to make
the argument that same-sex attraction is just like any other sin, while the
Constitution’s exposition of Scripture asserts that some sins are more heinous
than others (with homosexuality “more heinous” than even inappropriate
heterosexual activity by virtue of it being against nature).

While it is true that all people are sinners, it is not true that all sins alike are
equal. If they were, then every argument advanced by TE Johnson with respect
to same-sex attraction would have to apply equally to every kind of sin. The
sin of pedophilia would have to be considered no worse than anger; the sin of
bestiality no worse than drunkenness. While it is true that all people are sinners
and all deserve God’s wrath, and while it is true that no one’s righteousness is
good enough to contribute to his salvation, arguments for sin equivalencies
mock the word of God and dishonor Him.

Second, TE Johnson is a late middle-aged man of high achievement. He is
well-educated and has an earned PhD establishing him as an expert historian.
He is an author. He is a lifelong minster who carries the imprimatur of a
Seminary education and ordination by one of the most biblically sound
denominations in the world. All these things constitute aggravations of his
sinful same-sex attraction and his teaching related to it according to the
Constitution of the church. Question 151 of the Larger Catechism asks what
constitute aggravating factors for sins more heinous, and they are these: “…if
they (the persons offending) be of riper age, greater experience or grace,
eminent for profession, gifts, place, office, guides to others, and those whose
example is likely to be followed by others.”

TE Johnson not only dishonors God in his prominent self-identification as a
same-sex attracted man, the matter is made worse by his age, leadership
position, and level of achievement.

The ROC demonstrates that TE Johnson is capable of formulating an orthodox
view of sanctification, but it also demonstrates that he minimizes the
possibility of change for people suffering from sexual dysphoria. He
acknowledges that God can do anything in much the same way Cessationists
acknowledge that God could still perform a miracle in the world; that is, He
could, but He won’t. He contends strongly -on the basis of his research and
                                        803
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



experience- that orientation change practically never happens, citing statistics
that establish that only 3.5% to 4% of people will ever experience any change
from same-sex attraction to natural attraction.

In his arguments TE Johnson rests on appeals to his own authority, first as a
same-sex attracted man, then as an academic, then as a theologian, and then as
a minister. He communicates authoritatively and effectively, and he has clearly
convinced many that his understanding of how God interacts with same-sex
attracted people is the right one: God’s ability to change people affected by
this particular sin is only a remote possibility and should not be held out as a
realistic hope for Christians; it would be extremely rare that they might change.
There cannot be a more succinct denial of God’s power to sanctify.

At the same time, the form of this argument is the opposite of TE Johnson’s
argument about the equivalency of sin. First, he claims that all sin is alike and
SSA is no different from any other sin in order to establish that it cannot be a
disqualifying factor for ordination. He subsequently says that while all sin is
alike, and all people are sinners, sins related to sexual dysphoria are utterly
different in that God hardly ever acts to change people from them and therefore
those sins need to be accepted as an ontological phenomenon -they are part of
being. By that line of reasoning any other sexual sin must also be accepted as
a condition of being, whatever the perversion.

While the ROC doesn’t show that TE Johnson entirely denies that
sanctification could extend to a sexual orientation change, it clearly shows that
he doesn’t expect it to, even arguing that people need to understand the truth
and not be optimistic about change when they are saved [ROC 461, ROC 928,
etc.,]. In the same way, TE Johnson both claims the power of sanctification in
his life and denies it, particularly when he speaks about his sexual appetites,
which continue unabated:

        I share about once a year from the pulpit that I’m a porn
        addict. I haven’t actually looked at pornography for 15
        years, but when I did, I was all in and that pull is still as
        strong as it was. I’ve mortified this for 15 years and it still,
        you know, I see a computer terminal unmonitored and
        immediately my mind thinks, I want to look at porn. Fifteen
        years of strangling this thing, and it doesn’t die, it doesn’t
        go away [ROC 453}…



                                        804
                                 APPENDIX T



And:

        TE Johnson: “You wanna know about my sexual
        brokenness? I am happy to talk to you about what I talked
        about in the pulpit two weeks ago, and that I think is
        relevant to this conversation. I am a pornography addict.
        I have had a pornography addiction for 15 years. Actually
        18” Interviewer 2: “Are you still doing pornography,
        Greg?” TE Johnson: “No, I haven’t for 15 years.”
        Interviewer 1: 1 “So you’re not an addict.” Interviewer 2:
        “So you’re not an addict anymore.” TE Johnson: “Oh, but
        I know what it does inside of me. You see, I know that if I
        look at one image, I’m going to look at a thousand. I
        know I’m not going to come up for air for hours.” [ROC
        553-554, 568”]

Some might be tempted to minimize these statements because of the
circumstances of a live interview. TE Johnson says as much, having called the
interaction a “train wreck.” That is an assessment of the outcome but not
necessarily the conversation, since the interviewers were clearly trying to
dissuade TE Johnson from the point he was trying to make, while TE Johnson
himself argued harder and harder for his vulnerability to these sins in order to
impress upon them how powerful its control is over him. The Constitutional
aggravations listed above apply here. If TE Johnson were young or naïve or
inexperienced in public interactions, these might serve to mitigate his
responsibility for what he said; it might provide an argument from extenuation.
Instead, he is mature, educated, esteemed, and an accomplished public
speaker. He clearly believes what he insistently told these interviewers and his
words cannot be ignored.

By these beliefs and descriptions of his own experience, TE Johnson
minimizes God’s purposes and power in sanctification, while at the same time
demonstrating the grip by which his sin holds him. In his testimony [ROC
610], his sermons [ROC 606], his public speeches [ROC 556] and his writings
[ROC 812-830] TE Johnson has made his homosexuality central to his self-
perception, his self-presentation, and to his ministry. He has become a public
figure as a result, and it is clear from the record that he is regarded as an
authority on the subject -one who expressly teaches and intends to teach his
version of “truth” as it relates to SSA.



                                      805
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



While the ROC and his public utterances demonstrate great facility with
language and theological nuance and sometimes serve to obfuscate clear
issues, TE Johnson’s fundamental argument for serving as an ordained
minister of the gospel is that he is now -and has always been- chaste, making
him immune to disciplinary action for sexual misconduct.

By this standard no sexual predilection is disqualifying so long as it doesn’t
materialize in an act. Therefore, the pedophile who suffers in the way TE
Johnson does -that is, one who had no hope of change or no resistance to a
single look at child pornography such that he “…wouldn’t come up for air for
hours…” is eligible for ordination. The same would also clearly be true of
someone who struggled with illicit heterosexual attractions under the same
conditions, yet it is unimaginable that a man would be called as a minister of
the gospel who said, “I struggle with lust for women to the point that I don’t
expect change, and I’m also an addict who is one look away from complete
immersion in pornography -but don’t worry, I only think about it. I’m not
currently doing it.”.

Despite the many excellent points made by TE Johnson about the difficulties
faced by Christians who experience SSA or sexual dysphoria, and despite
much good advice on how to minister to “sexual minorities,” these arguments
cannot be applied without distinction to ordained service.

In summary, the SJC overlooked the clear deficiencies of Presbytery’s
investigation, which is proven by re-opening the record and admitting
additional information that sought the “present” positions of TE Johnson,
extending consideration of facts well beyond the events complained against.
Moreover, it was incumbent on the SJC to deal with the matters raised by the
Complainant as issues of Constitutional interpretation instead of deferring to
the lower court in this case. For these procedural reasons and based on the
merits of the complaint, we respectfully dissent from the majority decision.

This opinion was written by RE Steve Dowling and joined by joined by TE
Paul Bankson, RE John Bise, RE Mel Duncan, RE Sam Duncan, TE Fred
Greco, and RE John White.

           SJC ANSWER TO THE DISSENTING OPINION
                   of RE Steve Dowling et al.

SJC Manual 18.12.c permits the SJC to “Answer” a Dissenting or Concurring
Opinion, a procedure akin to the general answering provision in BCO 45-5.
                                     806
                                  APPENDIX T



While this procedure is rarely used, the Commission finds it necessary to take
this step in this present Case because we conclude that the referenced Dissent
mischaracterizes key conclusions of the SJC’s Decision. We are concerned
these mischaracterizations may lead to confusion in the Church regarding the
PCA Constitution and what the SJC actually decided in this Case, and, in turn,
how the Decision may apply to future situations.

Even as we take this step, however, we want to assure the Assembly the SJC
seeks to operate as a collegial court, and we have been blessed with a good
measure of success. We intend for our Answer to be understood in this light.

We organize our Answer by addressing some problematic assertions in the
Dissent, by responding to the procedural concerns raised, and by interacting
with the Dissent’s allegation that “the substantive conclusions reached by
Presbytery and confirmed by the SJC do not follow from the facts in the
Record of the case.”

1. Erroneous Assertions in the Dissent - Before addressing the specific
procedural and substantive concerns raised by the Dissent, we believe it
important to address three assertions in the Dissent that we find to be
problematic.

1A.     Erroneous Assertions 1 & 2: Concerning the Authority of a Church
        Court to Render a Constitutional Interpretation of SSA

The first two assertions are made in the following quote from the Dissent.
(Emphasis added.)

        [T]he SJC has affirmed Presbytery’s authority to make
        Constitutional and theological declarations on behalf of the
        denomination. Since the decision made by Presbytery in
        declining to indict has been affirmed, the SJC not only has
        reinforced the idea that this authority lies within individual
        Presbyteries, it has also formalized a dubious Constitutional
        interpretation of SSA and how it applies to ordination. (p. 4.)

First, contrary to the assertion in the quote, our ruling and opinion in this Case
do not “make” the Constitutional interpretation of “SSA” that is alleged in the
second half of the Dissent (pp. 4-7). Such a claim mistakenly construes the
ruling and opinion of the SJC in this Case. In each of the discussions of our
reasoning for declining to sustain the four substantive allegations brought in
                                       807
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



the Complaint, we concluded only that the Complainant had not met his
burden, based on the Record, of demonstrating Presbytery erred in declining
to indict TE Johnson. Thus, in responding to Allegation 1 we wrote:

          “If the Record demonstrated that the above statements [from
         the Complainant] were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s
         views, it would have been proper to sustain the Complaint.
         Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it was not
         unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does
         not hold these positions and that he affirms….”39

In short, we indicated that holding the kinds of positions alleged in the
Complaint would likely make an officer in the PCA liable to indictment by
their court of original jurisdiction. The conclusion, however, was that the
Record in this Case did not demonstrate Presbytery clearly erred in concluding
TE Johnson did not hold the views alleged. The dissenters may conclude the
SJC was wrong in that determination, and they have every right to make that
argument in a dissent. It is not accurate, however, to assert the SJC is staking
out a new position on “SSA” when the ruling and the opinion clearly affirm
that the SJC Decision was based on a finding that the facts in the Record did
not sustain the allegations that were made in the Complaint.

Having said that, we wish to highlight one other aspect of the SJC’s opinion
that contradicts this assertion of the Dissent. For each of the first three
allegations, our Opinion begins by providing quotes from the Complaint that
were offered in support of the given allegation. In each instance we then go
on to say: “If the Record demonstrated that the above statements were an
accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper to sustain
the Complaint.”40 For the fourth allegation, while the Opinion does not offer
statements from the Complaint, the Opinion does say:

         “If the Complainant had demonstrated, for example, that the
         minister was involved in homosexual behavior, cultivated
         unrepentant lustings, taught that either of those were not sinful,
         or was not continually seeking to mortify those temptations, it
         would have been proper to sustain the Complaint.”41

39
   Opinion p. 13. See identical conclusions on Allegations 2 and 3 on pp. 16, 18, and
   a similar conclusion to Allegation 4 on p. 23, changed only to reflect the different
   nature of this allegation.
40
   See Opinion pp. 13, 16, and 18.
41
   Opinion p. 23.
                                         808
                                      APPENDIX T



Our point in including all these statements was to try to set forth some
guiderails that reflect our understanding of the Confessional boundaries of
orthodoxy regarding beliefs and practices that can characterize ordained men
in the PCA on matters related to same-sex attraction, same-sex behaviors, etc.
We believe those statements reflect quite well the conclusions of the PCA’s
Ad Interim Committee on Sexuality.42 Thus, ironically, rather than setting
forth some novel “Constitutional interpretation of SSA” as the Dissent
suggests, the SJC’s Opinion contains a series of strong and consistent
statements that are grounded in the Church’s Confessional teaching on these
issues, and that echo the testimony of the Ad Interim Committee Report to that
teaching. The SJC did not find that the Record clearly provided evidence
showing Presbytery had erred in its decision not to indict TE Johnson. That
finding should not distract the reader from the clear, Confessional positions on
same-sex attraction and sexual immorality that are contained in the Opinion.

Second, in the Dissent’s quote cited above on page 1, the Dissent alleges the
SJC has “affirmed Presbytery’s authority to make Constitutional and
theological declarations on behalf of the denomination.” But this conclusion
is based on a misunderstanding of our polity. Presbyteries (and Sessions)
already have the right and responsibility to make Constitutional and
theological declarations. That right, however, comes not from anything the
SJC has done or could do, but from the nature of our graded courts. (See BCO
11-3,4.) 43 Thus, every court in the PCA is responsible to make theological

42
      https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-48th-GA-5-28-20-
   1.pdf
43
   BCO 11-3 - All Church courts are one in nature, constituted of the same elements,
   possessed inherently of the same kinds of rights and powers, and differing only as
   the Constitution may provide. When, however, according to Scriptural example, and
   needful to the purity and harmony of the whole Church, disputed matters of doctrine
   and order arising in the lower courts are referred to the higher courts for decision,
   such referral shall not be so exercised as to impinge upon the authority of the lower
   court. (Emphasis added.)
      BCO 11-4, para 2 - Every court has the right to resolve questions of doctrine and
   discipline seriously and reasonably proposed, and in general to maintain truth and
   righteousness, condemning erroneous opinions and practices which tend to the
   injury of the peace, purity, or progress of the Church. Although each court exercises
   exclusive original jurisdiction over all matters especially belonging to it, the lower
   courts are subject to the review and control of the higher courts, in regular gradation.
   These courts are not separate and independent tribunals, but they have a mutual
   relation, and every act of jurisdiction is the act of the whole Church performed by it
   through the appropriate organ.

                                           809
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



and Constitutional determinations as such issues come before them. Indeed, it
is precisely to protect that right of the lower courts that BCO 39-3 exists.44

At the same time, we recognize that right of the lower courts is not unlimited.
As BCO 11-4, BCO 39, and BCO 40 all make clear, there is a right and
responsibility of higher courts to exercise “review and control” over the lower
courts. But that oversight is clearly limited by the Constitution. It must also
be conducted within the proper purview and procedures of the higher court as
set forth in our Constitution and rules. Among other things, this means that
the SJC, in dealing with a complaint, is limited to the issues raised by the
parties45 and to the evidence contained in the Record of the case.46 For the SJC
to reach a conclusion that cannot be sustained from the Record, no matter how
popular that decision might be to some, would be a breach of its Constitutional
limitations and would trample upon the rights and responsibilities of the lower
courts in the PCA.

In short, far from affirming some new right for presbyteries, our Decision in
this Case serves to preserve the proper prerogatives of the lower courts of the
PCA and to underscore the right of review and control, appropriately
exercised, including through judicial process. Again, it would be mistaken to
conclude that the SJC has recognized some new right for presbyteries. Rather,
the SJC acted within the scope of our Constitutional responsibilities and limits.
In so doing, we found that the allegations in the Complaint regarding the views
held by TE Johnson were not sustained from the Record.

1B.      Erroneous Assertion 3: Concerning Acting on a Complaint and the
         Discipline of an Officer

The third erroneous assertion is found in this quote from the Dissent:

         TE Johnson provides enough evidence from his own
         statements to make it obvious that this characteristic
         (identifying himself as a ‘same-sex attracted man’) is so core
         to his being and so central to his personal narrative that it
         disqualifies him from ordained service. (p. 5)

This conclusion, at least as stated, asserts that the SJC should have found TE
Johnson guilty of an offence that must lead to his removal from ordained office

44
   Note the italicized material in the quote from BCO 11-3 in the footnote above.
45
   BCO 39-3.1. This is also the thrust of BCO 43-1,3; OMSJC 14.4, etc.
46
   BCO 32-18 (para. 5). See also the 4th vow for SJC members in RAO 17-1.
                                         810
                                   APPENDIX T



in the PCA. Such a finding, however, would go far beyond anything raised in
the Complaint or the Statement of the Issues in the Case. The statement of
Issue 2 reads “Did Missouri Presbytery clearly err…when it declined to
commence process on any of the following four allegations?” (Emphasis
added.) That is a very different issue than “Is TE Johnson guilty of any of the
following four allegations?” Thus, to reach the conclusion publicly offered by
the dissenters, the SJC would have had to go far beyond the issues raised in
the Complaint.

Further, and more importantly, our Constitution does not allow a higher court
to act on a complaint by declaring someone to be guilty. That is not one of the
remedies available to a higher court in adjudicating a complaint under BCO
43-10, and properly so. A complaint, in our Constitution, is always against the
action of a court. Therefore, the SJC, as the higher court, has no right to sustain
a complaint by declaring an officer guilty. All we can do is act with respect to
the lower court. Were the SJC to seek to declare a man to be guilty, such action
would be the epitome of a higher court “acting for” a lower court in violation
of the principles of BCO 11. Finally, it would be fundamentally unfair to any
man to be judged guilty based on a complaint and without benefit of a trial.
Yet, this is what a straightforward reading of the Dissent would have us do.

Thus, with all due respect for our brothers, we find that key assertions of their
Dissent do not accurately reflect the ruling of the SJC in this Case and are
inconsistent with the Constitution of the PCA. We now turn to the specific
points of error which the Dissent alleges were committed by the SJC.

2.      Answer to Allegations of Procedural Error

The Dissent addresses, at some length, two broad procedural issues: (a) due
diligence, particularly regarding the additional questions posed by the SJC to
Missouri Presbytery and to TE Johnson; and (b) the proper standard for review.
We address each of these in turn.

2A.     Due Diligence

The Dissent alleges “the SJC overlooked the clear deficiencies of Presbytery’s
investigation, which is proven by re-opening the record and admitting
additional information that sought the ‘present’ positions of TE Johnson.”
Indeed, the Dissent’s entire discussion of the SJC’s alleged procedural failures
in this area is tied to the SJC’s decision to reopen the Record and pose some
questions to Presbytery and to TE Johnson. Thus, the Dissent alleges the SJC’s
                                       811
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



action in posing these questions (and particularly our rationale) demonstrated
the SJC had concluded the ROC was unclear and that Presbytery had failed in
its due diligence. (p.1) The Dissent further alleges the citations from the
“supplemental work” suggest Presbytery’s investigation was inadequate.

Additionally, the Dissent alleges these questions led the SJC to focus on
TE Johnson’s “present positions,” apparently defined by the dissenters as his
positions in early 2021, as opposed to his positions during the period in which
Presbytery was conducting the BCO 31-2 investigation (2018-20).

It is important to recognize, first, that the Minutes of the SJC’s meeting on
March 25, 2021, referencing the debate on sending the SJC questions to
Presbytery and TE Johnson, state: “The Parliamentarian advised that this
motion and process were in order.” In addition, this is not the first time the
SJC has suggested or required the provision of additional information.47 Thus,
whether one agrees with the SJC’s course of action, it was based on a ruling
that such action would be in order, and it is an action for which there is
precedent.

        With regard to sending Questions, the Dissent alleges:

        This extension of time to the present and ex post
        facto acquisition of information on the part of the court appears
        to be a misuse of judicial discretion, with the court having
        undertaken more of a pseudo-BCO 31-2 investigation than an
        action to perfect the record. ... Discussions of fairness aside,
        TE Johnson’s present positions are irrelevant to the complaint
        against him. (Dissent p. 2, 3)

We are concerned statements such as this in the Dissent could easily lead
people to conclude there was broad opposition expressed to sending the
Questions. Because SJC discussions and actions relating to sending the
Questions occurred in “closed session,” we don’t feel the liberty to go into
much detail, but we assure the reader such a conclusion would be incorrect.48

47
   For example, see Aven/Dively v. Ohio Valley Presbytery (M44GA at 503-04);
   Barnes v. Heartland Presbytery (M44GA at 480 ff.); Fordice v. Pacific Northwest
   Presbytery (M45GA at 532).
48
   OMSJC 18.3 - “A Closed Session shall be understood as a meeting or portion of a
    meeting wherein only Commissioners, and others specifically invited by the
    Commission, are present. Unlike an Executive Session, however, the proceedings
    shall not be secret, but rather discussion of such matters outside of the meeting
                                        812
                                    APPENDIX T



More importantly, and with no disrespect to our dissenting brothers, we find
that they have arrived at their conclusion by focusing on individual phrases in
the SJC’s explanation for its action, without considering those phrases in the
context of the whole statement. The following is the entirety of the SJC’s
introduction to the list of questions that were sent to the Presbytery and
TE Johnson.

        The SJC believes it is necessary to attempt to clarify the
        Record of the Case because its magnitude (over 600 pages
        covering multiple years of writing, speaking, and judicial
        processes) makes it difficult to ascertain if specific
        representations of perspectives of TE Johnson are his actual or
        present theological convictions. We understand from the
        Record:
            - he has acknowledged some of his perspectives have
              matured over time;
            - he has acknowledged some were poorly stated due to
              time limits, situational pressures, or extemporaneity;
            - some representations of perspectives are made unclear
              by imprecision or disagreement over what aspect of sin
              is being referenced in specific statements;
            - some representations have been extrapolated by critics
              but denied by Johnson.
        Thus, the SJC offers TE Johnson the opportunity to answer
        questions with reference to the specific Allegations in the
        Complaint now before the Commission. Below are 25 questions
        arranged by the Allegations, with a fifth category titled
        “Additional/General.”

It should be clear from that introduction that the SJC’s point in seeking these
clarifications to the Record was not that Missouri Presbytery had failed in its
duty to investigate, but that the large number of reports, investigations, and
writings contained in the Record covered a period of years over which, by his
own admission, some of TE Johnson’s views were poorly stated and some had
“matured.” Further, some of the statements in the Record were ones that were

   shall be at the discretion of each commissioner, and the minutes of such a closed
   session may be read and approved in open session. However, no person present at
   a closed session shall later identify in any manner the views, speeches, or votes of
   a member of the commission during the closed session, apart from that member’s
   written permission.”

                                         813
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



made by TE Johnson’s critics about his views, but which he denied. Thus,
contrary to the conclusions of the Dissent on pp. 1-3, the effort by the SJC to
seek clarifications from TE Johnson and from Missouri Presbytery was not a
reflection on the quality of Missouri Presbytery’s Record or investigative
efforts (although some of us would have liked them to have pressed more
deeply on some issues). Nor was it an effort to develop evidence on views TE
Johnson held in May 2021 but did not hold during the time of Missouri
Presbytery’s investigations (2018-2020). Rather, it was a request to the
minister and Presbytery to pull together and focus pieces of his views that were
scattered throughout the Record and that had, in some instances, undergone
refinement during Presbytery’s investigations.

Further, none of the minister’s answers to SJC questions contradicted his
previous answers to the Presbytery. The Record does not indicate he answered
Presbytery one way but answered the SJC differently. Thus, what the Dissent
refers to as his “present” views are essentially the same as those expressed to
the Presbytery committee, and the Dissent does not identify any conflicting
pair of answers. Even the Complainant’s Addendum Brief recognized that the
answers to the Presbytery investigation committee and to the SJC were
substantively the same, by stating, “TE Johnson’s answers to the SJC questions
elaborate and confirm the very concerns raised in [my] Complaint.” (p. 1). The
Complainant did not contend there were any different answers.

The Dissent concludes its discussion of the BCO 31-2 procedures used by
Presbytery by contending: “If the investigation was inadequate, then
Presbytery’s conclusions constitute “clear error.” (p. 2) But this is a non
sequitur (a conclusion that does not follow from the previous statement).
Investigative procedures and indictment decisions are distinct issues, which is
why the SJC Decision specifies two Issues. Further, as we have explained, the
thrust of the SJC’s action to reopen the Record was not to assert the inadequacy
of the Record or the investigation, but to provide a more focused rehearsal of
TE Johnson’s views that were spread throughout the Record.

2B.        Standard of Review

The Dissent’s second procedural allegation is that the SJC used an improper
standard for review, arguing that the SJC was not bound by the “great
deference” requirement of BCO 39-3.3 “because this is a case centering on
Constitutional interpretation.” (p. 3)49

49
     This was also the claim of the other Dissent, from RE Duncan.

                                          814
                                  APPENDIX T




In considering this concern it is important to recognize there were two Issues
in this Case and they were dealt with differently. In the first Issue: “Did
Presbytery violate BCO 31-2 in the manner of its investigation of the
allegations?” the SJC applied the “clear error standard” of BCO 39-3.3 because
it found that no specific procedures are required by our Constitution in a 31-2
investigation and that the Record demonstrated that Presbytery “sought to
exercise the requisite ‘due diligence and great discretion’ in seeking
explanations from TE Johnson.” (Decision p. 12)

Regarding the second issue: “Did Missouri Presbytery clearly err at its meeting
of July 21, 2020, when it declined to commence process on any of the
following four allegations?” however, the focus is different. We grant that the
Complainant alleged TE Johnson held views that violated the Constitution of
the PCA. Had the Complainant been able to provide evidence that such views
were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, the SJC would have been
obliged to consider questions of “Constitutional interpretation.” But such was
not the case. As we state repeatedly in our ruling, the evidence provided in the
Record and discussed by Complainant did not clearly support the allegation
that Presbytery erred in concluding that there was not a “strong presumption
of guilt” that TE Johnson held the views the Complainant alleged he held.
Thus, for example, and as was stated above, in judging Allegation 1 we wrote:
“If the Record demonstrated that the above statements [of the Complainant]
were an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views, it would have been proper
to sustain the Complaint. Based on the Record, however, the SJC finds that it
was not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude that TE Johnson does not
hold these positions and that he affirms….” In other words, we did not have a
basis for applying BCO 39-3.4 because there was no question of Constitutional
interpretation before us. The evidence in the Record did not provide sufficient
support for the allegations made by Complainant regarding TE Johnson’s
views. Certainly, that is a factual finding with which the dissenters are free to
disagree and argue against. But that is a very different discussion than one of
whether the SJC failed to conclude that Missouri Presbytery had
misinterpreted the Constitution as it reached its conclusions.

3.      Answer to Substantive Concerns Raised by the Dissent

The Dissent alleges “the substantive conclusions reached by Presbytery and
confirmed by the SJC do not follow from the facts in the Record of the case.”
In considering this allegation, it is crucial to begin by understanding the SJC
did not “confirm” any “substantive conclusions” reached by Presbytery. Our
                                      815
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Decision repeatedly states that our Decision is based on the finding that the
Record does not demonstrate the Complainant’s interpretive conclusions of
certain statements were “an accurate summary of TE Johnson’s views,” and
thus it was “not unreasonable for Presbytery to conclude TE Johnson does not
hold those positions.” It was on that basis that we concluded Presbytery had
not erred in declining to commence formal judicial process against TE
Johnson.

In addition to all the above, we believe the Church would also be aided by an
Answer to two substantive issues raised in the Dissent: (a) the Dissent’s
contention that the Record demonstrates that “homosexuality is central to [TE
Johnson’s] self-perception, his self-presentation, and his ministry;” and (b) the
Dissent’s contention that the Record demonstrates TE Johnson errs in his
understanding of I Corinthians 6:9 and that he is engaged in “heinous sin.” We
address each in turn.

3A.     The Issue of Centrality

The Dissent alleges:

        In his testimony [ROC 610], his sermons [ROC 606], his
        public speeches [ROC 556] and his writings [ROC 812-830]
        TE Johnson has made his homosexuality central to his self-
        perception, his self-presentation, and to his ministry.” (Dissent
        p. 7)

A review of those citations demonstrates the assertion is untenable.
    - ROC 610 is a letter from Covenant Church, Fayetteville, AR to
       Missouri Presbytery, which only has one quoted sentence from the
       minister.
    - ROC 606 is also from Covenant Church and identifies a single sermon
       — May 19, 2019: “Testimony of a Unicorn,” even though there are
       eight years of the minister’s sermons on the Memorial Presbyterian
       Church website.
    - ROC 556 contains excerpts from the same May 2019 sermon and his
       short speech at the 47th GA critiquing Article 7 of the Nashville
       Statement and Overture 4 (which 40% of the GA commissioners also
       voted against).
    - ROC 812-830 contain eight items the minister wrote from May 2019
       through February 2020, which he submitted to the Presbytery’s
       investigating committee at its request. Of the eight items, only the
                                      816
                                 APPENDIX T



        Christianity Today testimony was published. The other seven were
        unpublished private correspondences.

This hardly demonstrates a centrality of self-perception, self-presentation, and
ministry. If there is some other evidence that leads the Dissent to make that
assertion, it was not in the Record, and surely not in the ROC sections cited in
the Dissent.

The minister’s testimony in Christianity Today ends with this statement:

        The gospel doesn’t erase this part of my story so much as it
        redeems it. My sexual orientation doesn’t define me. It’s not
        the most important or most interesting thing about me. It is the
        backdrop for that, the backdrop for the story of Jesus who
        rescued me.

3B.     1 Corinthians 6:9 and Heinousness

We first note that the arguments in the Dissent in this area were not raised
during the SJC debate on the draft Decision proposed by the Drafting
Committee. But even if they had been raised, the Answer below would have
been sufficient to settle them.

The Dissent alleges “some translators [use] the word homosexual to translate
arsenokoitai in 1 Corinthians 6:7-9.” (p. 4) While not explicitly saying so, the
Dissent seems to regard that single word as the best translation of the two
words malakoi and arsenokoitai. This translation decision is very important,
but the Dissent does not identify which translators it references or provide
argument as to why they should be favored over the many others that translate
those two words with a behavioral component. If the word homosexual is
intended throughout the Dissent to be synonymous with malakoi and
arsenokoitai, that would be important to know.

The ESV translates those two words as “men who practice homosexuality.”
The NIV translates it as “men who have sex with men.” The NRSV translates
it as “male prostitutes, sodomites.” The New English Translation renders it as
“passive homosexual partners, practicing homosexuals” and ends its two
lengthy footnotes with: “Since there is a distinction in contemporary usage
between sexual orientation and actual behavior, the qualification “practicing”



                                      817
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



was supplied in the translation, following the emphasis in BDAG.” 50 And
while the NASB translates malakoi and arsenokoitai simply as
“homosexuals,” it also supplies this footnote: “Two Gr[eek] words in the text,
prob.[ably refer to] submissive and dominant male homosexuals.” Thus, even
the NASB recognizes the behavioral component.

In the same section, the Dissent critiques one sentence from the minister’s
answer to Question 12 from Presbytery’s investigative committee, where he
wrote:

            Neither malakoi or arsenokoitai map very tightly onto this
            modern use of gay or homosexual or same-sex attracted as an
            orientation. [ROC 1070]

After quoting the sentence, the Dissent alleges:

            He is saying that the biblical strictures are not closely aligned
            with the “modern” use of the words as an “orientation,” but
            there is no biblical support for arguing that the concepts in
            1 Corinthians 6 are culturally bound. ... TE Johnson’s
            reinterpretation of the meanings of malakoi and arsenokoitai
            through a modern lens to make a distinction related to
            “orientation” does little to clarify the issue from a biblical
            standpoint. (Dissent p. 4)

But it’s not reasonable to draw such a conclusion from the minister’s sentence,
especially in context. Presbytery’s question was this: “How do you understand
1 Cor. 6:9-11 and its application to Christians that identify as celibate gay
Christians?” In his answer, his sentence immediately following the one
quoted in the Dissent says: “These [malakoi and arsenokoitai] speak of sex
acts ... among men. Such men will not enter the kingdom.”

In addition, the minister’s sentence quoted by the Dissent does not say “the
concepts” of 1 Corinthians 6 are “culturally bound.” And the Record does not
demonstrate the minister has “reinterpreted” the meanings of malakoi or
arsenokoitai, but simply recognizes the importance of the behavioral component
in those two words, as do the ESV, NIV, NRSV, NET, NASB, etc. 51

50
     Bauer, Danker, Arndt, and Gingrich (Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament)
51
     The Dissent’s use of the phrase “culturally bound” is itself unclear. Does 'culturally
     bound' mean the text is 'culturally conditioned' (which of course it is) or does it mean
                                              818
                                     APPENDIX T




It is more reasonable to understand the minister’s sentence as highlighting the
difference between the homosexual behaviors indicated by malakoi and
arsenokoitai and the temptations (orientation) of homosexuality. In other
words, it was reasonable for Presbytery to conclude the minister’s sentence
simply affirms someone could be homosexually inclined, but not be malakos
or arsenokoitēs.52
Regarding heinousness, the Dissent also alleges the minister:

         ... appeals to the universality of sin to make the argument that
         same-sex attraction is just like any other sin, while the
         Constitution’s exposition of Scripture asserts that some sins
         are more heinous than others (with homosexuality “more
         heinous” than even inappropriate heterosexual activity by
         virtue of it being against nature).” (p. 5. Emphasis added.)

If the Dissent is intending the word homosexuality in this parenthetical to be
identical with malakoi and arsenokoitai (contra how those Greek words are
understood in this Answer), then we have less concern with the excerpt above.
But the Dissent’s parenthetical seems to use homosexuality in a more general
sense, and if so, it seems to argue homosexual temptations are more heinous
than heterosexual sinful behavior (which appears to be what’s meant by
“inappropriate activity.”) If that’s not what’s being asserted, then it’s hard to
understand why the word “even” is used in the comparison.

Regardless, the Dissent’s contention about the minister’s view is contradicted
by the following statement from the minister quoted in the SJC Decision:

         Sins are not all equally heinous (WLC 150). But they are all
         heinous. Having sex with someone of the same sex is very
         heinous. Before we ever get to the Standards, the Bible is clear
         on this point. For a man to lie with another man as one lies with
         a woman, it is an abomination. Paul picks up the Hebrew of

   that the text is only applicable in Corinth (which the minister clearly denies in his
   answer to the “heinousness” question)?
52
    The minister also addressed 1 Cor. 6:9 in his lengthy answer to Question 7 from the
   Presbytery committee. In one part, he wrote: “The term homosexual is not in the
   Hebrew/Greek Bible. Sexual orientation is a nineteenth century scientific and social
   construct. In 1 Corinthians 6, for example, malakoi and arsenokoitai refer not to
   sexual orientation or temptation but to actual sexual practice between two men.”
   [ROC 1062]
                                          819
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           Leviticus—arsenokoitai, literally “male bed”—to prohibit it in
           no uncertain terms as sin that that will keep a man out of the
           kingdom.

           All other things being equal, I would consider homosexual
           immorality to be more heinous than heterosexual immorality
           on account of the way it further warps God's creational norm
           for sex. As in WLC 151, it goes against the “light of nature.”
           Romans 1 notes it is unnatural. (SJC Decision, p. 26-27)

In addition, the Dissent’s parenthetical assertion would be difficult to
demonstrate biblically and was clearly addressed and critiqued in the 2020
Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Sexuality.53 Below is an excerpt, with
emphasis added.

           Finally, we can discern a very practical value to the distinction
           between the sin that is constituted by our “corruption of
           nature…and all the motions thereof” and the “actual
           transgressions” that proceed from it. ... To feel a sinfully
           disordered sexual attraction (of any kind) is properly to be
           called sin—and all sin, “both original and actual” earns God’s
           wrath (WCF 6.6)—but it is significantly less heinous (using the
           language of the WLC 151) than any level of acting upon it in
           thought or deed. ... (AIC Report p. 23.)

Below are five other pertinent excerpts from the AIC Report. All emphasis
is added.

           Statement 6 (Temptation) ... Nevertheless ... We can avoid
           “entering into” temptation by refusing to internally ponder and
           entertain the proposal and desire to actual sin. Without some
           distinction between (1) the illicit temptations that arise in us
           due to original sin and (2) the willful giving over to actual sin,
           Christians will be too discouraged to “make every effort” at
           growth in godliness and will feel like failures in their necessary
           efforts to be holy as God is holy (2 Peter 1:5-7; 1 Peter 1:14-
           16). (p. 9)


53
     https://pcaga.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/AIC-Report-to-48th-GA-5-28-20-1.pdf


                                          820
                          APPENDIX T



Essay 1: Confessional Foundations Regarding Nature of
Temptation, Sin and Repentance

II.B.1. The Common Dynamic of Concupiscence - First, the
dynamic of spontaneous sinful desire or attraction is not unique
to those who experience homosexual desire. All people
experience it. It is an essential point in the Confession that all
of us who are descended from Adam and Eve experience their
corrupted nature and the complex of disordered affections,
desires, and attractions that come with that corruption. The
danger of this question arising in the context of the discussion
of homosexuality is that some might be tempted to think of that
particular example of disordered desire as qualitatively
different from their own. Or worse, some may be willing to
assert the sinfulness of one category of spontaneous desire but
minimize or remain largely ignorant of the sinful
concupiscence that is common to all.
         The truth is that if we think humbly and carefully about
our own spontaneous thoughts, feelings, and desires, we would
recognize that we are all much more alike than different. ...
Good Reformed teaching on sin places us all on equal footing
in our need of Christ’s imputed righteousness. (p. 21)

II.B.2. Continued Corruption - [To] teach that our sinful
corruption must be entirely removed from any part of us in
order to be considered truly repentant is a spiritually
treacherous perversion of the doctrine of repentance. (p. 21)

II.B.5. Moral Difference - ... Our brothers and sisters who resist
and repent of enduring feelings of same-sex attraction are
powerful examples to us all of what this “daily mortification”
looks like in “the best of believers.” We should be encouraged
and challenged by their example and eager to join in fellowship
with them for the mutual strengthening of our faith, hope, and
love. (p. 23)

Essay 2: Biblical Perspectives for Pastoral Care - Discipleship,
Identity and Terminology Singleness, Friendship, Community
- Insofar as such persons display the requisite Christian
maturity, we do not consider this sin struggle automatically to


                              821
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        disqualify someone for leadership in the church (1 Cor 6:9-11,
        1 Tim 3:1-7, Titus 1:6-9; 2 Pet 1:3-11) (p. 31)

Conclusion

         While appreciating our dissenting brothers’ zeal for truth, and their
evident desire to promote the peace and purity of the Church, we believe, as
we have shown above, that their Dissent does not accurately reflect either the
Record in this Case or the ruling and opinion of the SJC. Unfortunately, it is
likely that as these inaccuracies are spread in the Church, people will follow
the dissenters in drawing conclusions about the SJC’s ruling and its
understanding of sexual ethics that are neither accurate nor fairly adduced
from the Decision. It is for this reason that we find it necessary to provide this
Answer.


                     CASE NO. 2021-12
                     COMPLAINT OF
       CHRISTIAN MICHELSON AND STUART MICHELSON
                            v.
            NORTHWEST GEORGIA PRESBYTERY
                      February 1, 2022

The Complaint is not judicially in order, and the defect cannot be cured within
the Rules of Discipline of the BCO; therefore, the case is dismissed. OMSJC
10.5-6.

RATIONALE

The Complaint as presented to the Session does not identify any act of that
court alleged to be in error, thus failing to meet the standard set forth in BCO
43-1, “A complaint is a written representation made against some act or
decision of a court of the Church. It is the right of any communing member of
the Church in good standing to make complaint against any action of a court
to whose jurisdiction he is subject. . .” (emphasis added). (See also BCO 43-
10, “The higher court has power, in its discretion, to annul the whole or any
part of the action of a lower court against which complaint has been
made. . . .” (emphasis added.) According to the ROC, the only act of the
Midway Session with respect to the congregation meeting in question is that
of the Session meeting of July 8, 2020: The act of calling a congregational
meeting (ROC 217). That action is not objected to in the Complaint. Further,
the congregational meeting of July 19, 2020 (ROC 226-252), afforded the
                                       822
                                 APPENDIX T



Congregation the opportunity to change any of the acts that the Complaint
alleges to be erroneous:

       [the] change the call of three Assistant Pastors to the role of
       Associate Pastor through a stand vote that was conducted
       without the recommendation of a pulpit committee (violating
       BCO 20-2), without ballots (violating BCO 20-4), as a slate
       (violating BCO 20-4), with no abstentions counted (violating
       BCO 20-4), and with a significant minority opposed (violating
       BCO 20-5). . . . ” (p. 1, lines 13-17).

It was the Congregation that acted to call without a pulpit committee; it was
the congregation that decided to place an all-or-none election slate, and so on.
Any one of these acts could have been rejected by majority vote of the
Congregation, and the Session would have been powerless to order it
otherwise. But a congregation meeting is not a court of the Church, and the
BCO has no provision that allows a Complaint against congregational actions.
This decision does not mean, however, that there is no redress should a
congregation take an action that violates the Constitution of the Presbyterian
Church in America. There are at least three possible ways by which an alleged
unconstitutional action of a Congregation could be dealt with by the higher
courts.
First, one with standing could complain against the action of the
Congregation at the point a court of the Church sought to implement the
alleged unconstitutional decision. Thus, for example, if a Congregation elected
a man to their Session who had not been trained or examined by Session per
BCO 24-1 the Session’s action to install the man would be subject to
Complaint. Similarly, if a Congregation voted to call a pastor in a way that
violated the Constitution, the action of the Presbytery in approving the call
would be subject to complaint by one who had standing.

Second, Presbytery could take note of a Constitutional deficiency in a
congregational meeting in their review of the records of the Session (note BCO
25-5, last sentence and BCO 13-9(b)).

Third, under BCO 13-9.f, the Presbytery has power, “. . . to visit churches for
the purpose of inquiring into and redressing the evils that may have arisen in
them. . . .” Thus, any Constitutional irregularity at a congregational meeting,
credibly brought to the attention of Presbytery, may be investigated, and upon
a finding of error, may be redressed by the Presbytery.


                                      823
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



None of these possible responses was before us in this Complaint. The
Complaint before us is focused directly on the actions of the congregational
meeting themselves, and, as has been noted, there is no basis in our
Constitution for a complaint against the actions of a Congregation per se.

This decision was unanimously approved by the Panel and amended and
approved by the SJC on the following roll call vote:
      Bankson Not qual.      M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Dissent           S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Dissent
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Concur                 Pickering Dissent
      Carrell Not qual.      Greco Concur                 Ross Dissent
      Chapell Not qual.      Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur          Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Dissent        Lucas Concur                 White Dissent
      Dowling Dissent        McGowan Not voting           Wilson Dissent
      (12-8-1)

                             Dissenting Opinion
                             of RE Jack Wilson

BCO 43-1 provides, “A complaint is a written representation made against
some act or decision of a court of the Church.”

The Commission determined that the Complaint was judicially out of order for
failing to identify an act of the lower court (in this case a local session). We
believe the Complaint did identify an act or decision of the Session and
complain against that act. For this reason, we respectfully dissent.

The Complainants alleged that their Session erred by calling a congregational
meeting for stated purposes which were arguably at odds with the Constitution.
They complain, “…against the actions of the Session…in connection with
their [sic] recommendation of July 9, 2020 that the congregation…approve the
transition of three assistant pastors to the status of associate pastor
simultaneously…” (ROC 268). This action, according to the motion Session
adopted at a called meeting the day before, proposed that the congregation
consent to the election of pastoral candidates via a procedure that the
Complainants contended was in conflict with BCO 20-2. No congregational
meeting was called by the Session to elect a pulpit committee. The
Complainants further alleged that the election was improperly conducted
without ballots (which are prescribed in BCO 20-4).


                                      824
                                 APPENDIX T



The portion of the Complaint quoted above identifies an action or decision of
the lower court, namely the calling of a congregational meeting at which the
Session would recommend procedures which were alleged to be at odds with
the Book of Church Order. We find this part of the Complaint sufficient to
identify an “act” or “decision” under BCO 43-1. In our view, this allegation
was sufficient to present a justiciable issue.

We note that the Complainants also present a number of issues regarding the
actions of the congregation which may not be justiciable. We recognize, like
the majority, that the BCO does not currently contain any express provision
for complaint against the act of a congregation. That fact does not impair the
viability of the complaint against the act or decision to call the meeting with
the purposes and parameters stated by the Session. We express no opinion on
the merits of the Complaint or whether the Record of the Case, as compiled to
this point, would support or prove the allegations of the Complaint. We simply
believe at least one justiciable issue was presented in the Complaint. We
would have found the Complaint judicially in order and assigned it to a panel
for adjudication.
This dissenting opinion was written by RE Jack Wilson and joined by RE John
Bise, RE Steve Dowling, RE E.J. Nusbaum, RE John Pickering, TE Michael
Ross, and RE John White.


                         CASE NO. 2020-02
                          In the Matter of
           BCO 34-1 Requests to Assume Original Jurisdiction
                           March 3, 2022

The SJC answers the BCO 34-1 requests from Central Georgia, Southeast
Alabama, and Savannah River Presbyteries (2020 Overtures 2, 4 and 25), by
reference to the SJC’s October 21, 2021, Decision in Case 2020-12: TE Ryan
Speck v. Missouri Presbytery and the SJC’s March 3, 2022, Decision in Case
2020-05: TE Ryan Speck v. Missouri Presbytery. RE Mel Duncan requested
that his negative vote be recorded.




                                     825
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                           CASE NO. 2020-05
                           TE RYAN SPECK
                                  v.
                        MISSOURI PRESBYTERY
                       DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                             March 3, 2022

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

In July 2018, Memorial Presbyterian Church (PCA) (“Memorial”) in St. Louis
hosted the first Revoice Conference (“Revoice 18”). Thereafter, several
individuals, sessions, and presbyteries communicated concerns to Memorial
and to Missouri Presbytery (“MOP” or “Presbytery”) regarding Revoice 18.
In light of these concerns, in October 2018 the pastor of Memorial, TE Greg
Johnson, and its Session requested that MOP accept, as a BCO 41 Reference,
the Session’s request to investigate it with regard to the allegations pertaining
to the hosting of Revoice 2018. MOP voted to approve a lengthy report issued
by its investigative committee in May 2019. The report contained, among
other things, nine theological judgments. Complainant complained against
MOP’s adoption of the nine theological judgments in July 2019. MOP
partially sustained his complaint in October 2019 and voted to reconsider its
affirmation of the nine theological judgments at a future called meeting.
Complainant unsuccessfully tried to add a question about adoption by gay
couples and individuals to the matters to be considered at the future meeting.

In December 2019, at a meeting called to reconsider the nine theological
judgments, Complainant raised a point of order concerning the procedures
used by MOP’s Administrative Committee in preparation for the meeting, but
Presbytery’s Moderator ruled the point of order not well taken, a ruling that
was sustained after challenge. MOP reconsidered the nine theological
judgments and adopted amended statements to eight of them, referring the
ninth judgment to an ad hoc committee for reconsideration. In January 2020,
Complainant complained against MOP’s actions at the December 2019
meeting, a Complaint which Presbytery denied in July 2020. Complainant
then carried his complaint to the SJC. The Panel conducted the hearing on
September 14, 2021 and recommended that the Complaint be denied. The full
SJC reviewed the case on March 3, 2022 and approved the following decision
to sustain the Complaint in part and to deny it in part.




                                      826
                                APPENDIX T



I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

07/26/18   Memorial hosted the three-day Revoice 2018 conference.

09/07/18   The Session of Covenant PCA, Harrisonburg, VA sent a seven-
           page letter to the Memorial Session regarding Memorial’s
           involvement in Revoice 2018.

09/27/18   TE Andrew Dionne sent a letter to the Memorial Session, which
           was co-signed by 20 other PCA TEs. (At the time, TE Dionne was
           pastor of Trinity PCA in Spartanburg, SC. Trinity and TE Dionne
           left the PCA in May 2019 to affiliate with the non-PCA “Evangel
           Presbytery.”) Among other things, the letter exhorted Memorial
           Session “to repent of [their] sin of promoting and hosting the 2018
           Revoice Conference.”

10/10/18   TE Johnson and Session of Memorial sent a letter to MOP
           requesting Presbytery, among other things, to accept, as a BCO 41
           Reference, the Session’s request for Presbytery to investigate it
           with regard to the allegations pertaining to hosting Revoice 2018.

10/16/18   At a Stated Meeting, MOP’s Administrative Committee
           announced that “Presbytery had received a request for reference
           from Memorial Presbyterian’s Session due to complaints the
           church has received due to the Revoice Conference” and that the
           Committee Chairman “had formed an investigative committee
           [hereinafter, “Committee to Investigate Memorial,” or “CIM”]
           chaired by TE Ron Lutjens.”

10/25/18   Calvary Presbytery sent a 9-page letter to MOP.

11/13/18   Southwest Florida Presbytery sent a 12-page letter to MOP.

01/15/19   At a Stated Meeting, MOP heard the CIM report on its progress.
           Presbytery referred all letters pertaining to Revoice to CIM
           (including the letters already sent from Calvary Presbytery and
           Southwest Florida Presbytery).

01/26/19   Savannah River Presbytery sent a one-page letter to MOP
           supporting the October 2018 letter from Calvary Presbytery.


                                    827
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



 05/18/19 At a Called Meeting, MOP considered the 115-page CIM report,
          which had been previously distributed by email. MOP voted to
          approve the concluding statements and nine theological
          judgments (“9 Theological Judgments”).

07/08/19    TE Ryan Speck filed a complaint with Presbytery regarding the 9
            Theological Judgments. (This is not the complaint later carried to
            the SJC; this is a separate complaint that was not carried forward.)

07/11/19    TE Greg Johnson and Memorial Session sent a two-page letter to
            Presbytery responding to the May 2019 CIM Report.

07/16/19    At a Stated Meeting, MOP appointed a committee to respond to
            Memorial Session’s July 11 letter and appointed a Complaint
            Review Committee (“CRC1”), composed of TEs Polski, Porter
            and York and REs Myers and Lauerman, to review TE Speck’s
            July 8 Complaint.

10/15/19    At its Stated Meeting, MOP considered the thirty-page CRC1
            Report, which recommended sustaining part of the Complaint, as
            follows: “The finding of the CRC is that the MOP did err by
            failing to judge Revoice 18 for advancing positions contrary to the
            scriptures and our confessional standards and therefore we
            recommend that this aspect of the complaint be sustained.” MOP
            partially sustained TE Speck’s July 2019 complaint and voted to
            reconsider its affirmation of the 9 Theological Judgments at a
            future called meeting. TE Speck moved to put the following
            question on the December 7, 2019, called meeting docket: “Did
            Revoice 18 err by encouraging gay couples and gay individuals to
            adopt children, and, if so, is this a serious error that [MOP] needs
            publicly to correct and clearly warn against?” MOP voted against
            this motion. Presbytery also created an ad hoc study committee to
            create a short statement of affirmations and denials regarding
            human sexuality (hereafter, “A&D Committee.”)

10/18/2019 TE Speck emailed the MOP’s Moderator, TE Tim LeCroy, asking
           him to consider adding to the docket of the December 7, 2019,
           called meeting the gay adoption question requested on October 15,
           to be discussed alongside the 9 Theological Judgments.



                                      828
                                APPENDIX T



11/30/2019 MOP’s Stated Clerk emailed members of MOP, with documents
           attached, to prepare members for the December 7, 2019, meeting
           of MOP which had been called to reconsider the 9 Theological
           Judgments.

12/07/2019 At the called meeting, TE Speck raised a point of order objecting
           to some of the procedures of MOP’s Administrative Committee
           as out of order. MOP’s Moderator ruled TE Speck’s point of order
           not well taken; after a challenge to the ruling, MOP voted to
           sustain the ruling.       MOP reconsidered the 9 Theological
           Judgments and adopted amended statements to eight of them,
           referring one question to an ad hoc committee to reconsider the
           question of “Queer Treasure.” (Judgment 7) The newly amended
           and adopted statements included both affirmation and criticism of
           parts of Revoice 18. MOP authorized its Administrative
           Committee to draft a letter communicating these changes.

01/03/20   TE Speck filed a Complaint with MOP against MOP’s actions
           taken at the December 7, 2019, meeting (this is the Complaint
           which later became the basis of Case 2020-05) alleging the
           following errors:

           1. Approval of Theological Judgments 1-5 and 9 of the "MOP
              Presbytery Ad Hoc Committee to Investigate Memorial
              Presbyterian Church for Hosting the Revoice 18 Conference
              in July 2018" (CIM), which Complainant contends are
              contrary to the Scriptures and to the Confessional Standards
              of the Presbyterian Church in America; and

           2. Denial of TE Speck's point of order regarding the Administrative
              Committee's (AdCom) handling of the December 7, 2019,
              meeting; and

           3. Refusal to debate and rule on the propriety of gay couples
              adopting children, as advanced at Revoice 18.

           Below are the six MOP Judgments complained against in the first
              item of TE Speck’s Complaint.

           1. We concur with the CIM’s judgment that the evidence does
              not demonstrate the allegation that Revoice 18 grounded
                                    829
       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    homoerotic desire and actions in Creation rather than in the
    Fall, thereby advocating for a position contrary to Scripture
    and our confession of faith, and one grave and serious enough
    that it needs to be repudiated by Memorial.

2. We concur that terms like “gay,” “sexual orientation,” “queer,”
   “sexual minorities,” etc., are not always or necessarily
   unbiblical; and therefore, that Revoice 18’s use of the
   terminology in question, though confusing to some and
   potentially unwise, was not a grave and serious doctrinal
   error.

3. We concur with the CIM’s judgment that the evidence was
   such that this question as to whether a “gay beneath the gay”
   exists could not have been judged to be a key teaching of
   Revoice, but continues have the potential for becoming a
   grave and serious error if it begins to play a more central role,
   and thus we exhort those involved with Revoice to consider
   our position on this matter.

4. We concur with CIM and deny that it is always a grave and
   serious error worthy of repudiation to claim something which
   can be traced to our sin nature as in any sense a part of our
   “identity,” of part of “who we are,” as Revoice does with
   being SSA. While enduring patterns of brokenness and sin
   remain part of “who we are,” of our “identity,” as children of
   Adam, nevertheless sinful desires and deeds must be put to
   death. We concur that the core question is not: “Is that which
   rises from sin part of who you are?” but rather: “What are you
   doing with all the broken parts and places of who you are?”

5. We concur that (i) celibate SSA believers face complex
   barriers in developing friendships with people of the same
   gender and that, (ii) Christians must labor to empathize with
   this difficulty and that, (iii) it was unwise and hence an error
   of judgment rather than an error striking at the vitals of
   religion for Revoice leaders to be entertaining publicly the
   possibility of celibate partnerships without more careful
   boundaries proposed and that, (iv) TE Johnson adequately
   warned about the dangers of these type of friendships in his
   own Revoice 18 talk.
                          830
                               APPENDIX T




           9. We concur with the CIM’s judgment that although Memorial
              erred in failing to make clear to their congregation our
              doctrinal differences with Roman Catholicism before and
              after the Revoice 18 conference, it did not err in allowing
              Roman Catholics to speak in their church building under the
              aegis of Revoice, an outside organization, and therefore did
              not act in such a way as to strike at the vitals of religion.

01/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, MOP referred TE Speck’s Jan. 2020 Complaint
           to a new Complaint Review Committee (“CRC2”) composed of
           TEs Polski, TE Dey, RE Jones and RE Bauer. In addition,
           Presbytery discussed a draft from the A&D Committee.

06/02/20   At a called meeting, Presbytery adopted the 49 Affirmations and
           Denials proposed in its A&D Committee Report. A&D Members
           included TEs Dan Doriani, Mark Dalbey, and Ryan Laughlin, and
           RE Sean Maney. The 8-page Report was posted at:
           https://drive.google.com/file/d/197ZR63Fg_TCwOswHjjz7Il2Ja
           F1O7mjI/view.

           The 49 A&D’s were in two Parts:

           1. Concise Biblical Theology of Sexuality with Reference to
              Homosexuality (1-28).
           2. Homosexuality and Identity in Current Debate (29-49).
07/21/20   At a Stated Meeting, MOP considered the forty-page CRC2
           Report, which recommended denying all the specifications of
           error in the Complaint, but also recommended revising
           Theological Judgments 2 (Terminology) and 5 (Spiritual
           Friendships). Presbytery declined the Committee’s proposed
           revision to Judgment 2 and adopted its recommended revision to
           Judgment 5. Presbytery then denied TE Speck’s January 3, 2020,
           Complaint. It also heard the report of the Committee to Reconsider
           Queer Treasure (the one of the 9 Theological Judgments not
           approved on December 7, 2019), voting to find fault with this
           lecture given at Revoice 18.

7/23/2020 TE Speck carried his January 3, 2020, Complaint to the General
          Assembly (Case 2020-05).


                                    831
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



9/14/2021 The Panel (Chairman RE John Pickering, Secretary TE Paul
          Bankson, RE Dan Carrell, and Alternates RE John Bise and TE
          David Coffin) conducted the hearing.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

   1   At its December 7, 2019, Called Meeting, did Missouri Presbytery
       (MOP) err in approving six theological judgments (specifically,
       Judgments # 1-5 and #9) recommended by CIM (Committee to
       Investigate Memorial)? Complainant’s specifications of errors
       concern:

       MOP Theological Judgment 1 (“Origins of Homoerotic Desire”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 2 (“Terminology”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 3 (“The Gay Beneath the Gay”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 4 (“Gay Identity”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 5 (“Spiritual Friendship”)
       MOP Theological Judgment 9 (“Roman Catholic Speakers”)

   2. Did the MOP err when it acted to deny TE Speck's point of order
      regarding the Administrative Committee's handling of the December
      7, 2019 meeting?

   3. Did the MOP err when it acted to refuse to debate and rule on the
      propriety of gay couples adopting children, as Complainant suggests
      was advanced at Revoice 18?

III. JUDGMENTS

   1. Yes, particularly with regard to MOP Theological Judgments 2, 3,
      and 5.
   2. No.
   3. No.

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

A. Issue 1 –Did Missouri Presbytery err in approving the Committee to
   Investigate Memorial’s (CIM) Theological Allegations and
   Judgments on #1-5 and #9?



                                  832
                                      APPENDIX T



Missouri Presbytery erred when it approved Judgments # 1-5 and #9 of CIM.
Two matters account for Presbytery’s error. The first is that MOP employed
incorrect criteria for review in adjudicating the allegations presented within
the Complaint. The second is that MOP failed to act properly in light of what
it found based even on those incorrect criteria. This is reflected in its actions
on Theological Judgments #1-5, #9, and considered in light of the findings of
CIM and the Complaint Review Committee (CRC). The matter of the incorrect
criteria for review and the matter of MOP’s failure to act properly will be
reviewed in turn.

MOP’s Criteria for Review

On December 7, 2019, at the recommendation of its Committee to Investigate
Memorial (CIM), MOP adopted eight “Theological Judgments.” TE Ryan
Speck filed Complaint against six of these Judgments (Theological Judgments
#1-5, #9).54 In presenting these recommendations, CIM employed criteria for
review that it explicitly articulated in its committee report. CIM urged that “the
core principles of justice enumerated in BCO Chapter 34 ought to govern …
the Memorial Session’s role in their decision to host Revoice 18; and … those
principles should also govern our assessment of the theological teachings of
Revoice, as we found them in the talks of the Revoice 18 speakers and in their
writings and teachings in other venues”. CIM further appealed to the
“stipulations in BCO 40.5” as “relevant … to this situation…”. BCO 40-5,
CIM reasoned, “seems to have in view not simply doctrinal teaching of
ministers that may be erroneous or divisive (which seems to be the focus of
BCO 34.5), but any and all ‘constitutional’ breaches that a lower court may
have committed.” CIM therefore argued that they were to make a
determination whether “the Memorial elders and pastor [are] guilty of an
important delinquency and/or a grossly unconstitutional proceeding in
allowing the outside group, Revoice, to use its facilities for its conference” (
emphasis in original). Any alleged errors could “not simply [be] errors, but
errors so serious that they strike at the vitals of religion (in faith or morals)
AND as well, are industriously spread (emphasis in original). Thus, CIM
declared that “in our process we considered BCO chapters 29, 34, and 40 in
determining whether either Revoice or Memorial committed errors that strike
at the vitals of religion or simply errors resulting from the weakness of human
understanding.”

54
     CIM presented nine Theological Judgments to MOP. On December 7, 2019, MOP
     adopted eight of those Theological Judgments, and referred a ninth to a committee
     of Presbytery. TE Speck filed complaint against six of the remaining eight
     Theological Judgments.
                                          833
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



CIM’s recommendations to Presbytery with respect to Theological Judgments
#1-5, #9 contain language explicitly reflecting these criteria – “grave and
serious” (#1, #2, #3, #4), “error of judgment rather than an error striking at the
vitals of religion” (#5), “strike at the vitals of religion” (#9). Since Presbytery
adopted each of these motions, it thereby employed, whether intentionally or
not, CIM’s standard in assessing the teachings of Revoice 18 that were before
it.55

But, in doing so, CIM and Presbytery conflated the language of BCO 34 and
40 into a single criterion. By so doing, they defined “any important
delinquency or grossly unconstitutional proceedings” from BCO 40-5 as
consisting only of “Heresy and schism...that strike at the vitals of religion and
are industriously spread” as set forth in BCO 34-5. This is, however, an
inaccurate reading of BCO 40-5 and thus was an erroneous criterion for MOP
to apply to the teachings of Revoice. In conflating the language of BCO 34
and 40, CIM and Presbytery crafted a criterion for assessing the actions of
courts of the PCA that is based on the Constitutional standard to be used when
undertaking process against a teaching elder. There is no Constitutional reason
that the latter should define the former. BCO 34 governs “special rules
pertaining to process against a minister.” But the teachings in question at
Revoice 18 were not being taught exclusively by member teaching elders of
MOP. The individuals teaching at Revoice 18 were both officers and non-
officers, within the PCA and outside the PCA. There is no Constitutional
reason why the standard articulated in BCO 34-5 should have been applied
beyond its narrow scope, that is, process concerning a PCA teaching elder.
Further, in creating this new criterion CIM and MOP apparently overlooked
Constitutional material regarding the responsibilities of the courts of the PCA
that should have guided their application of BCO 40-5 to this matter.

The proper Constitutional criteria to be applied in matters arising under BCO
40-5 are those found at BCO 11-3,4 and at BCO 13-9(f) which deal with the
responsibilities of courts. BCO 11-4 affirms that “every court has the right to
resolve questions of doctrine and discipline seriously and reasonably
proposed, and in general to maintain truth and righteousness, condemning
erroneous opinions and practices which tend to the injury of the peace, purity,
or progress of the church.” BCO 11-3 permits “disputed matters of doctrine
and order arising in the lower courts” to be “referred to the higher courts for

55
     In several places in this Reasoning, for the sake of brevity, we use the phrases,
     “the teachings of Revoice 18” or “the teachings of Revoice.” By those phrases we
     mean the teaching of some of the speakers at the Revoice 18 Conference.

                                           834
                                  APPENDIX T



decision,” while BCO 13-9(f). enumerates among the powers of Presbytery,
“to condemn erroneous opinions which injure the purity or peace of the
Church.” BCO 11-3 affirms, then, that when “disputed matters of doctrine” are
Constitutionally brought from a lower court to a higher court, then the higher
court may lawfully render “decision” with respect to those matters. BCO 13-
9(f) articulates the proper criteria for evaluation. If an “opinion” is not only
“erroneous” but also “injure[s] the purity or peace of the Church,” then
Presbytery may lawfully “condemn” that opinion.

MOP’s Findings

The Findings of MOP

The importance of applying the proper Constitutional criteria surfaces when
we consider Presbytery’s motions with respect to the Theological Judgments
that are the subject of this Complaint. The motions that MOP adopted with
respect to these Theological Judgments reflect some measure of concern
relating to teachings of Revoice 18 –

        Revoice 18’s use of the terminology in question, though
        confusing to some and potentially unwise, was not a grave and
        serious doctrinal error” (Theological Judgment #2).

        We concur with the CIM’s judgment that the evidence was
        such that this question as to whether a ‘gay beneath the gay’
        exists could not have been judged to be a key teaching of
        Revoice, but continues to have the potential for becoming a
        grave and serious error if it begins to play a more central role,
        and thus we exhort those involved with Revoice to consider
        our position on this matter (Theological Judgment #3).

        We concur that i) celibate SSA believers face complex barriers
        in developing friendships with people of the same gender and
        that, ii) Christians must labor to empathize with this difficulty
        and that, iii) it was unwise and hence an error of judgment
        rather than an error striking at the vitals of religion for Revoice
        leaders to be entertaining publicly the possibility of celibate
        partnerships without more careful boundaries proposed and
        that, iv) TE Johnson adequately warned about the dangers of
        these type of friendships in his own Revoice 18 talk.
        (Theological Judgment #5)
                                       835
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Importantly, the language of concern in the motions cited above was left in
place by the findings of a subsequent committee, the Second Speck Complaint
Review Committee [CRC2], and the actions of MOP on the July 21, 2020
recommendations of that committee.

Although MOP registered concern with respect to the teachings of Revoice 18
in view in Theological Judgments 2, 3, and 5, it declined to take further action
than it did. MOP unnecessarily restrained itself by the incorrect criteria for
review that it opted to follow in evaluating the teachings of Revoice 18.
Consequently, it did not take adequate action with respect to the errors that it
had identified (Theological Judgments 3, 5), and with respect to teachings that
it identified as “confusing to some and potentially unwise” (Theological
Judgment 2).

The Findings of Committees of MOP

Significantly, the committees of MOP (CIM, CRC) registered greater concern
in their findings than did MOP in its adopted Judgments. Consider first the
findings of CIM. With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological
Judgment 2, CIM noted, “we do agree that the way Revoice and Side B
believers in general use terms has been confusing to many in our churches, and
we expressed regret that they were not more sensitive to this confusion”;
“These terms [“like ‘gay,’ ‘sexual orientation,’ ‘queer,’ and ‘sexual
minorities’”] [have] potential to cause offense and division within the church”;
and “We sincerely wish that Revoice leaders would have had a greater sense
of the responsibility they carry to explain their use of terms more fully to the
church they profess to need.” Compare the subsequent and confirmatory
finding of CRC2, “some of these terms [‘gay,’ ‘sexual orientation,’ ‘queer,’
‘sexual minorities’] may well have been used at Revoice 18 in such a way in
which they were inconsistent, unwise and confusing to many observers of the
conference, thereby contributing to the disturbance of the peace of the church.”

With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological Judgment 3, CIM
noted, “The use of terms such as ‘same-sex-attracted’ or ‘gay’ in the way
Revoice 18 and many Side B people use them … indulges in needless and
potentially dangerous speculation”; “If one takes these terms the way that
Revoice and many Side B people take them … then the allegation is true that
Revoice has committed at least an error of imprudence by indulging in
needless and potentially dangerous speculation, and it remains to be seen
whether this error will be used in such a way as to strike at the vitals of
religion”; “Revoice leaders and speakers do use terms that historically were
                                      836
                                   APPENDIX T



synonymous with ‘homoerotic desire’ in a way that expands them to include
morally good features that are claimed to be underneath or behind the illicit
sexual desires. These terms include ‘homosexual,’ ‘same sex attraction,’ ‘gay,’
and ‘homosexual attraction.’ This leads them to say that not everything about
‘being gay’ or ‘same-sex-attracted’ has to do with sinful sexual desires”; “[the
danger is that] this speculation [regarding morally benign qualities tied to
homoerotic desire] appears to us to be the prospect of this becoming a central
plank in the thinking and approach of some of Revoice’s leaders” ; and “We
feel constrained to warn against any expansion of the terms ‘same-sex-
attraction’ and ‘being gay’ with its creation of a category of ‘gayness,’
understood as a way of experiencing the world. This seems to us to be a
potentially dangerous error of speculation; yet we cannot say with unwavering
confidence that we believe it to be an error so serious and obviously destructive
of good morals and sound doctrine that we judge it to be an error which ‘strikes
at the vitals of religion’ in the areas of doctrine and morals. We do believe it to
be at least a lesser error of indulging in necessary and potentially dangerous
speculation, something we are warned against as believers (see 1 Timothy 1:3-4).”

With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological Judgment 5, CIM
noted, “we concluded that entertaining celibate partnerships was unwise – at
least to whatever degree they were being given serious consideration. CIM
regarded this as an error of judgment and not of doctrine…” (emphasis in
original); “[I]t is … our judgment that, to the extent that Revoice event
entertains the possibility of ‘celibate partnerships’ … it has erred in offering
unwise, unedifying relational arrangements to SSA Christians (cf. 1 Cor.
6:12)”; and “[W]e … believe that [Revoice] are open to the danger of a
preoccupation with technical boundaries on physical limits in friendships to
the neglect of the deeper inner dynamic involved in SSA romantic coupling,
and the way it mimics the longing and the personal pull toward the other person
that draws a man and woman together toward an exclusive intimacy that is
designed by God to move them toward marriage.”

With respect to the teachings addressed by Theological Judgment 4, MOP
concluded, “We concur with CIM and deny that it is always a grave and serious
error worthy of repudiation to claim something which can be traced to our sin
nature as in any sense a part of our ‘identity,’ of [sic] part of ‘who we are,’ as
Revoice does with being SSA. While enduring patterns of brokenness and sin
remain part of ‘who we are,’ of our ‘identity,’ as children of Adam,
nevertheless sinful desires and deeds must be put to death. We concur that the
core question is not: ‘Is that which rises from sin part of who you are?” but
rather: “What are you doing with all the broken parts and places of who you
                                       837
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



are?” But CIM’s findings with respect to Theological Judgment 4 raised
concerns that MOP’s action did not: “[W]e believe that the language of ‘gay
Christian’ … poses a particularly challenging problem for both the Revoice
project and its critics. We encourage Revoice and those who would adopt such
language to do so with great care, recognizing its potential to cause offense
and division within the church.”

Consider next the findings of CRC. The Complaint Review Committee (CRC),
which was appointed to hear an earlier (July, 2019) complaint of TE Speck
against actions of MOP taken on recommendation of its CIM, registered
particular concerns with Revoice 18. As to same-sex friendships, “The
majority on the CRC along with the CIM itself … were very concerned with
this way [i.e. the way advocated at Revoice 18] of applying the truths that are
in this passage [i.e., 1 Sam 18:3, Ruth 1:16-17] and concluded that applying
texts in this manner was a significant hermeneutical error that needed to be
clearly corrected and warned against by the MOP and MPC.” As to a particular
speaker’s specific statement with respect to gay orientation – “Without
wishing to disparage the speaker whatsoever (who herself acknowledged that
she was engaging intentionally in speculation) the CRC nonetheless must
conclude that, in this confined moment, speculations were put forward that
caused damage to the peace and purity of the church and possibly to the souls
of her members.” As to so-called gay culture, “The CRC concurs with
complainant’s concerns, based primarily on the language of WCF 20-1 and its
supporting proof texts, that [a Revoice speaker] went too far in suggesting that
believers in Christ should closely identify with and willfully associate
themselves with even the so-called ‘non-homoerotic’ aspects of
LGBQT/Queer Culture and in so doing did indeed make assertions that ‘struck
at the vitals of religion.’” As to use of language, “We … believe that some of
the terms being used are so provocative and so widely misunderstood that
believers ought to be extraordinarily careful in their use and perhaps even
refrain from using them at all, especially when speaking in public venues.”

CRC no less registered broad concern with the way in which Revoice 18 had
disrupted the church. In its October, 2019 report to Presbytery, CRC
acknowledged that “the peace of the church … had been highly disturbed by
some aspects of what was said at the Revoice 18 conference”; [W]e judge that
some of the matters of controversy at Revoice 18 were of … a variety of error
(whether they be errors “arising from the weakness of human understanding”
or “striking at the vitals”), … widely misunderstood by the wider church and



                                      838
                                     APPENDIX T



… damaging to the peace of the church;56 “there was such grave confusion in
the church about what some of the speakers at Revoice 18 meant by what they
were saying that it became incumbent on the MOP to be more clear about its
own views in those areas where the confusion was greatest.”

The failure of MOP to deal properly with the issues raised in the Complaint is
magnified by two additional points. First, the concerning teachings did not
occur in isolation. In other words, it was not a situation where one individual
made a concerning statement on one day in one area of the Presbytery, while
another individual offered a different concerning statement on a separate issue
on another day in another part of the Presbytery, while a third individual made
a concerning statement on yet another issue in yet another part of the
Presbytery. All of the statements cited in the Complaint and in the various
reports of MOP committees and commissions were made at the same
Conference dealing with the same general topic. Thus, it is most reasonable
to judge the level of error and level of potential harm by considering the
cumulative impact of the errors and concerns across the whole of the
Conference. In disposing of the allegations by dealing with each one as a
separate entity and stating, in essence, that if there was an error in the specific
area it was only minor, MOP apparently missed the fact that the cumulative
impact of those errors could and did add up to a major concern.

Second, while MOP did take action to try to make sure that the Congregation
of Memorial Presbyterian Church was alerted to possible errors and that steps
were taken to mitigate the possible harm to the peace and purity of that
Congregation as a result of those errors, it is not evident that MOP dealt
appropriately with its responsibility to take similar steps with regard to the
broader Church. Certainly, the question of the breadth of impact of erroneous
teachings at Revoice 18 was raised with the Presbytery. Significantly, the
chair of CIM declared to MOP in January, 2019 “his sorrow over his own
passivity in failing to ask Presbytery … to get involved in the Revoice
controversy, especially after it was over, when our brothers at Memorial could
have benefitted from our counsel, encouragement, and inquiry, and when it
ought to have been clear to him that the controversy was proving to be so
divisive and widespread that it virtually constrained Presbytery’s
involvement.” Similarly, the communications from various individuals and
courts throughout the Denomination gave indication that the peace and purity
of the broader church were being impacted. Yet, while MOP was, commendably,

56
     The CRC makes this statement of its comment that MOP was hasty in its action in
     May, 2019. MOP, in October, 2019 “rescinded” its May, 2019 action and called a
     December, 2019 meeting to “reconsider the nine judgments of the CIM.”
                                         839
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



willing to interact with those communications, there is no evidence that
Presbytery clearly stated to the broader church that it recognized the errors that
were taught at Revoice 18 and the impact of those teachings. Further, it is not
clear that Presbytery sought to do what it could to mitigate the impact of those
erroneous teachings on the peace and purity of the Church. We recognize that
this lack of response by MOP may well have come about because of their use
of the incorrect criteria as discussed above, but that does not change the fact
that MOP did not do what it needed to do to protect the peace and purity of the
broader Church, particularly in light of the responsibilities set forth in BCO
11-3, 4.57

The Record shows, therefore, that more than one committee of Presbytery
acknowledged multiple teachings at Revoice 18 to have been erroneous in
themselves and disruptive to the peace of the Church. Similar concerns were
registered about the conference as a whole. MOP adopted language that, if
anything, was milder and weaker than statements (cited above) appearing in
its committees’ reports to Presbytery. But even so, Presbytery adopted
language that, according to the Constitutional criteria set forth in BCO 11-3, 4
and 13-9(f), required it to take action that it neglected to take.

B. Issue 2 –Did Missouri Presbytery err when it acted to deny a point of
   order regarding its December 7, 2019, meeting?

Complainant argues that MOP violated its own standing rules when its Stated
Clerk circulated materials prepared by MOP’s Administrative Committee in
advance of the December 7, 2019, meeting. According to Complainant,
MOP’s Standing Rule 8.3.C. limits the Administrative Committee to a purely
administrative role; it is “specifically forbidden to institute new work.”
Complainant argues that the portion of the materials circulated comprised of
what the Stated Clerk described in his email to the members of Presbytery as


57
     BCO 11-3, “When … according to Scriptural example, and needful to the purity and
     harmony of the whole Church, disputed matters of doctrine and order arising in the
     lower courts are referred to the higher courts for decision…” BCO 11-4, “Every
     court has the right to resolve questions of doctrine and discipline seriously and
     reasonably proposed, and in general to maintain truth and righteousness,
     condemning erroneous opinions and practices, which tend to the injury of the peace,
     purity, or progress of the Church …. These courts are not separate and independent
     tribunals, but they have a mutual relation, and every act of jurisdiction is the act of
     the whole Church performed by it through the appropriate organ.”


                                             840
                                  APPENDIX T



“briefs on the nine theological questions we will be considering” constituted
impermissible “new work.” Complainant also objects to the characterization
of the briefs by the Stated Clerk as having been prepared by “[t]he CIM in
conjunction with the Administrative Committee” because the CIM had been
dismissed with thanks by MOP some six months earlier. Complainant finds
the latter matter particularly irksome because Complainant was himself a
member of the CIM, and he was not invited to participate in the preparation of
the briefs. Finally, to add insult to injury, “select CIM members were allowed
the last 5 minutes of each debate time in order to speak for approval of each of
the 9 Judgments.” Complainant raised a point of order concerning these
matters at the beginning of the December 6, 2019, meeting, but the Moderator
ruled it not well taken, and his ruling survived a challenge by vote of the
Presbytery.

Since the facts are not disputed, the question or whether MOP’s actions
violated its Standing Rules is a pure question of law, but unlike the other
questions of law in this case, it is not a question to be decided under the PCA’s
Constitution. It is, instead, a question to be decided under MOP’s Standing
Rules, and the leading authority on that subject, MOP, has already ruled. It is
not the place of the SJC to instruct MOP on what its own Standing Rules mean.
In any case, by voting to uphold the Moderator’s ruling, MOP set aside any
violation of its Standing Rules by effectively modifying them for purposes of
the materials circulated by the Moderator. We will not disturb that decision.

It is possible, of course, that MOP’s actions also violated the BCO, and we do
have the authority and responsibility to interpret and apply the BCO without
deferring to MOP’s interpretation. The BCO contains no “new work”
prohibition for administrative committees generally, so that part of
Complainant’s argument fails to advance. But the BCO does contain clear
rules for the appointment and dismissal of committees. To that extent, the
Stated Clerk’s email was in error; the briefs were not prepared by the CIM at
all, as the CIM no longer existed. However, they were evidently prepared by
men who had been members of the CIM and who had evidently voted in the
majority on the CIM concerning the CIM’s report. Had the Stated Clerk’s
email described the briefs as being prepared by “men who were members of
the CIM in conjunction with the [Administrative Committee],” Complainant
would have had no basis to object regarding the CIM reference. It strains
credulity, however, to believe that presbyters’ votes on the 9 Theological
Judgments were swayed by the mistaken impression that the full CIM had
participated in the preparation of the briefs rather than some of its members
who supported the CIM’s report, particularly since Complainant brought the
                                      841
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



inaccuracy of the Stated Clerk’s email to the attention of the Presbytery at the
beginning of the meeting. We conclude that the Stated Clerk’s error was
harmless error as to the outcome of the vote, although understandably it was
not harmless to the feelings of the Complainant. It appears to be an error of
the type for which a personal apology would be appropriate, and which should
be accepted absent evidence of malice on the part of the Stated Clerk, which
Complainant has not alleged. Finally, there is the issue of permitting former
members of the CIM to have the last 5 minutes in debate. Presbyteries are free
to structure debate on matters of this nature as they see fit within the governing
rules, and we see nothing in the rules to prohibit this process as adopted by
MOP.

C. Issue 3 –Did Missouri Presbytery erred when it acted to decline a
   proposal for debate at its December 7, 2019, meeting?

Complainant objects that MOP, at its October 15, 2019, meeting, voted down
his proposal to consider at the December 7, 2019, called meeting the question
of statements at Revoice 18 concerning the adoption of children by gay
couples. He notes that the Complaint Review Committee that considered his
July 8, 2019 Complaint (not the complaint at issue in this case, but the prior
complaint) stated in its report that it agreed with Complainant “that the MOP
owes a clearer statement to the church in relation to its views on non-traditional
adoptions and especially adoptions by actively homosexual ‘married’
couples.” (quoting report of MOP’s Complaint Review Committee). He also
emphasizes the comments of one invited guest at a Revoice 18 workshop who
stated that she was “thrilled” to see gay couples adopting children. However,
as detailed in the Complaint, the CIM apparently spoke with the leader of the
workshop in question, who said that “the comment was made in the context of
talking about whether it was better to leave unadopted children in the state
foster care system until they ‘age out’ of it, or be in favor [of] allowing gay
couples to adopt them.” (quoting CIM report). The CIM report went on to
state that “[W]hile we can understand how someone might take a comment
like that to be a general endorsement of gay couples adopting children, we
consider it unwarranted to construe an off-hand remark, made in the context
of that very particular conversation – and by only a guest of the speaker – as
an endorsement made by the workshop and thus by Revoice.”

We are sympathetic to Complainant’s desire for his Presbytery to consider an
important issue raised by a comment made by a guest at a Revoice 18
workshop. However, that is insufficient reason for us to order a presbytery to
take up a question of this nature. If Complainant had shown that adoption was
a central issue of Revoice 18, or even that multiple speakers had spoken in
                                       842
                                 APPENDIX T



favor of it, we would want to know why MOP did not include that issue in its
9 Theological Judgments. But that is not the case. One comment by one guest
of a speaker at a conference, taken out of context, is not enough to require a
theological determination by a presbytery.

D. Amends

This matter is remanded to MOP Presbytery with instructions that it “hold a
new hearing” (BCO 43-10) which need focus only on the following matters:
“What steps must MOP take to make clear to the broader Church the errors
that were identified in Presbytery’s various investigations with regard to some
of the teachings at Revoice 18, particularly with regard to Theological
Judgments 2, 3, and 5, and what steps must MOP take to fulfill its
responsibilities to protect the peace and purity of the broader Church under
BCO 11-3, 11-4 and 13-9(f) in light of those errors?”

In its new review, we encourage Presbytery to consider interacting with the
May 2020 Report of the General Assembly’s Ad Interim Committee on
Human Sexuality and how specific statements of some speakers at Revoice 18
may have differed from the propositions in that Report. We understand the
AIC Report had only been published for two months when Presbytery declined
to sustain this Complaint, and we recognize the Report does not have
Constitutional status.

The Statement of the three Issues, the Judgments on Issues 2 and 3, and the
Reasoning for Judgments 2 and 3, are largely as they were proposed by the
Panel, as drafted by RE John Pickering, and amended and approved by the
Panel. Judgment 1, the Reasoning for Judgment 1, and the Amends are largely
as they were proposed as a substitute by TE Guy Waters and RE Frederick
Neikirk.

The SJC adopted amendments to several parts and adopted the final decision
on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur         M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur            S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Concur                 Pickering Dissent
      Carrell Concur         Greco Concur                 Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur         Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Dissent         Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur         Lucas Concur                 White Concur
      Dowling Concur         McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (22-2-0)

                                     843
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                         CONCURRING OPINION
                          of RE Howie Donahoe

I write to explain the extent of my concurrence, with reasons, and my
understanding of the Decision. Note, however, a Concurring Opinion is not,
by any means, an authoritative interpretation of any Decision.

1. The Panel’s Proposed Decision - When a case comes to the SJC, a three-
judge panel is randomly drawn to conduct the hearing and draft a proposed
decision. In our present Case, I regarded the reasoning in the Panel’s proposed
decision to be some of the finest writing and clearest argumentation I’ve read
in my 23 years on the court. I hope some of that reasoning will appear in a
dissenting opinion. I agreed with the Panel’s proposed judgments on each of
Presbytery’s six Theological Judgments (“TJs”), and for the reasons provided
by the Panel.

The Panel addressed the allegations of error as specifically stated and
characterized in the Complaint. That was a fair and reasonable approach. The
final SJC Decision, however, dug deeper to address underlying criteria, which
wasn’t necessarily required to adjudicate the Complaint, but it wasn’t
Constitutionally prohibited either. I simply agreed it was reasonable for the
SJC to remand for Presbytery to consider whether the errors already identified
by its several committees (CIM, CRC1, CRC2) “[tended] to the injury of the
peace, purity, or progress of the Church” (the “TIPPPC” criteria, BCO 11-4).
Such errors might not have been identified as such because Presbytery
ultimately applied the narrower “strikes at the vitals of religion” criteria when
adopting the six TJs (the “SVR” criteria, BCO 34-5). This scenario might be
akin to hiring a home inspector to assess all the major systems (plumbing,
HVAC, electrical, foundation), and though he judged all those were working
properly, he didn’t comment on some of the leaks in the roof even though he
noticed them.

2. SJC Standards of Review - I was not initially supportive of the judgment
offered as a substitute for the Panel’s proposed judgment on Issue 1, because
I thought it raised an issue not raised by the parties, which is something
ordinarily restrained by BCO 39-3.1 (below). Subsequently, however, I came
to a different view.

        BCO 39-3 ... To insure that this Constitution is not amended,
        violated or disregarded in judicial process, any review of the


                                      844
                                     APPENDIX T



           judicial proceedings of a lower court by a higher court shall be
           guided by the following principles:
           1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should limit itself
           to the issues raised by the parties to the case in the original
           (lower) court. ... (Emphasis added.)

Some might contend the review limitation of BCO 39-3.1 allows no
exceptions. But the BCO ordinarily recognizes an important distinction
between “should” and “shall.” In the BCO excerpt above, those different
words are used in adjoining sentences and it’s hard to imagine that textual
choice was accidental. The review principles in BCO 39-3, sections 1-4, are
meant to ensure our Constitution is “not amended, violated, or disregarded in
judicial process.” It follows that an overly-strict adherence to only matters
raised by the parties could create the very damage BCO 39-3 is designed to
prevent.

More importantly, and directly related to this present Case, the question about
proper Constitutional criteria is not a new or separate issue, per se, but simply
a reason for the SJC finding a procedural defect in reaching the six TJs.
Addressing an unraised-but-critical procedural matter is different than raising
a new issue. 58

While the following is not a perfect illustration, it might help. Let’s say a
church member is convicted at trial by his Session, and he appeals to
Presbytery. In adjudicating the appeal, the Presbytery declines to “hold a
hearing” and denies the appeal based on the Record sent up by the Session,
which failed to include the trial transcript (contra BCO 42-8 and 34-7). The
SJC might be hesitant to overrule the Session and Presbytery on the merits of
the conviction but sustain the appeal nonetheless and remand for a new hearing
based on Presbytery’s significant Constitutional and procedural mistakes -
regardless of whether the appellant raised the questions in his appeal carried
to the SJC.

Another example that might pertain occurred 18 years ago in Case 2001-32. A
session denied “John Doe’s” complaint, he carried it to the Presbytery, and it
sustained his complaint on the merits. The Session then carried a complaint to
the SJC against Presbytery’s decision. But the SJC declared the matter
judicially out-of-order on the procedural grounds that Doe had filed his

58
      It’s also worth noting the Complainant himself used the SVR criterion in his
     Complaint and in his Brief, and repeatedly asked the SJC to declare that certain
     teachings at R18 “struck at the vitals of religion.”
                                          845
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



complaint with the Session one day after the filing deadline in BCO 43-1.
Nobody had ever raised the BCO 43-1 matter, but the SJC apparently did not
interpret BCO 39-3.1 as prohibiting it from reaching to that Constitutional
breach as its reason to rule it out-of-order. And even though the SJC’s ruling
was procedural, it essentially annulled Presbytery’s judgment and rejected
Doe’s original complaint against the Session, despite the Session adjudicating
it, and Presbytery sustaining it. (The SJC ruling came 24 months after Doe
filed his original complaint with the Session.) 59

More recently, at the SJC’s March 2022 meeting where our present Case was
decided, the SJC ruled a complaint judicially out-of-order because the record
showed the complainant did not have standing, and this was after his
Presbytery had adjudicated his complaint without raising the Constitutional
irregularity. (Case 2021-07 RE Acree v. TN Valley). With reference to BCO
39-3.1, I understand the present Decision to be akin to the examples above.

3. “Revoice 18” - Both the Complaint and Presbytery’s six TJs used phrases
like “the teaching of Revoice 18” or “Revoice 18’s use of ....” This could lead
some to think Presbytery was evaluating an organization rather than
allegations about teachings of individuals at a conference sponsored by that
organization. Some statements in the Complaint and in Presbytery’s TJs seem
to speak as if R18 was a document or an entity, rather than a collection of
different speakers. The SJC Decision is more careful by providing this
footnote on page 7: “In several places in this Reasoning, for the sake of brevity,
we use the phrases, ‘the teachings of Revoice 18’ or ‘the teachings of Revoice.’
By those phrases we mean the teaching of some of the speakers at the Revoice
18 Conference.” (Emphasis added.) It’s reasonable to assume that some things
said by speakers at R18 might not have been officially-adopted statements or
positions of what was then a relatively new organization, and that the
organization’s board may have subsequently adopted official statements or
positions on some of these matters. I understand the Complaint only
references teachings at the July 2018 conference, but the broader church (and
the TIPPPC criteria) might warrant Presbytery also interacting with any
subsequent official statements of the organization. And it would seem any
59
     Session of Christ Covenant v. Central Carolina, M31GA, p. 107. This was decided
     five years after the 25th GA added BCO 39-3 standards of review at the Colorado
     Springs GA in 1997. While the Ad Interim Committee on Judicial Procedures
     (which proposed BCO 39-3 in a multi-recommendation, single package to the Ft.
     Lauderdale GA in 1996) might have intended the new standards of review section
     to preclude what the SJC did in our present Case, the members of the SJC five years
     later did not interpret BCO 39-3.1 that way. (M24GA, p. 97; M25GA, p. 116;
     M31GA, p. 107)
                                           846
                                    APPENDIX T



official statements in place today might be more pertinent to the broader
church than any teachings from July 2018 that might be judged as TIPPPC.

It's also important to realize the SJC judges were not required to review any of
the seminar videos from R18. We have no jurisdictional responsibilities for
that conference, and more importantly, none of them were in the Record of the
Case, nor was the SJC required or asked to take judicial notice of them. SJC
Vow 4 requires us to affirm the following: “I will judge according to the
Constitution of the PCA, through my best efforts applied to nothing other than
the record of the case and other documents properly before me.”

4. Amends - I don’t interpret this Decision to say Presbytery must conduct a
new investigation to apply the TIPPPC criteria (just like the home inspector
doesn’t need to return to the house.) Presbytery can simply review and express
some or all the critiques previously offered by its various committees,
assuming it deems them valid and if they reasonably trigger concern under the
TIPPPC criteria. While the Decision doesn’t also suggest the following, it
might help if Presbytery cited parts of its own 49 “Affirmations and Denials
on Sexuality,” which was in the Record of this Case. For the members of the
Memorial Presbyterian Church and the members of the PCA, what this
Presbytery believes and teaches is probably more clearly and accurately
reflected in Presbytery-adopted statements like the A&Ds rather than in any
critique of some person’s teaching at a conference four years ago.60

The Amends also instruct Presbytery to “[take] steps ... to fulfill its
responsibilities to protect the peace and purity of the broader Church ... in light
of those [TIPPPC] errors” previously identified by MOP Committees. While
the SJC was not obligated to define those “steps,” it could have. And it’s quite
possible different SJC judges might have different things in mind. To be frank,
it’s sometimes easier for judges to reach agreement on language when the
language seems to have some flexibility. Ultimately, however, whether
Presbytery’s response results in greater peace in the broader church is not
solely its responsibility. Maintaining peace is a two-way street (or, better yet,
an eight-lane highway).

This Concurring Opinion was written by RE Howie Donahoe and joined by
TE Ray Cannata.


60
     It’s worth noting the 47th GA’s AIC Report was published four months after TE
     Speck’s January 2020 Complaint was filed with Presbytery, and the Presbytery
     adopted the 49 A&D’s five months after that same January filing.
     https://drive.google.com/file/d/197ZR63Fg_TCwOswHjjz7Il2JaF1O7mjI/view
                                        847
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                               DISSENTING OPINION
                               Of RE John D. Pickering,

I dissent in the Judgment as to Issue 1 and concur in the Judgments as to
Issues 2 and 3.

The Court holds that MOP applied the wrong standard in its search for
erroneous teaching at Revoice 18, pointing to MOP’s emphasis on “[h]eresy
and schism…that strike at the vitals of religion and are industriously spread”
as set forth in BCO 34-5. Court Opinion at 7, lines 12-13. Instead, MOP
should have applied the standards in BCO 11-3,4 and BCO 13-9(f), which
permits courts to resolve questions of doctrine, maintain truth and
righteousness, and condemn erroneous opinions and practices which impinge
on the purity and peace of the church. Because it “unnecessarily restrained
itself by the incorrect criteria for review that it opted to follow,” it “did not
take adequate action with respect to the errors that it had identified.” Court
Opinion at 8, lines 34-36. In other words, MOP was hunting for the trophies
of heresy and schism while passing over the lesser game of erroneous
opinions.61 Significantly, though, the Court does not hold that the erroneous
opinions voiced at Revoice 18 rise to the level of heresy and schism that strike
at the vitals of religion. If the Court held that view, it would have been
unnecessary to comment on the standard of review employed by MOP in order
to justify the Court’s decision. There simply were no trophies to be had on
this hunt.

In any case, I am unconvinced by the Court’s “cumulative impact” approach.
The Court’s view is that “disposing of the allegations by dealing with each one
as a separate entity” misses the fact that the “cumulative impact of those errors
could and did add up to a major concern.” Court Opinion at 11, lines 8-11.
Or, as the saying goes, “the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.” But in
some cases, taken literally, that could mean that 2 + 2 = 5. I believe the Court
has arrived at the wrong answer to the equation, at least with respect to MOP
Theological Judgments 1, 3, and 9.



61
      While I agree with the Court’s analysis of the correct standard of review to be
     applied by presbyteries in cases of this nature, I note that the Complainant neither
     raised this issue in his Complaint nor at oral argument. TE Coffin’s dissent, in which
     I join, explains the significance of this fact.


                                             848
                                  APPENDIX T



Standard of Review for This Court

Regardless of the standard of review MOP should have used, this Court is
obliged to consider the factual issues in this case under the standards of review
set forth in BCO 39-3, which call for “great deference to a lower court
regarding those factual matters which the lower court is more competent to
determine, because of its proximity to the events in question, and because of
its personal knowledge and observations of the parties and witnesses
involved.” This Court is not permitted to reverse a lower court’s factual
findings “unless there is clear error on the part of the lower court.” Thus, with
respect to facts determined by the lower court and reflected in the Record of
the Case, clear error is our standard of review.

On the other hand, we are not required to defer to the lower court “when the
issues being reviewed involve the interpretation of the Constitution of the
Church.” With respect to such issues, we are to interpret and apply the
Constitution according to our “best abilities and understanding, regardless of
the opinion of the lower court.” This standard applies to questions of law, as
opposed to questions of fact.

We face pure questions of fact on some issues and pure questions of law in the
remaining issues. For example, some of CIM’s theological judgments include
factual findings about what was actually taught at Revoice 18, and some
contain determinations of law as to whether what was taught violates our
Constitution. We must defer, absent clear error, to the lower court as to the
factual findings about what was actually taught, which is decisive for some
issues, but we are not required to defer to the lower court as to the
constitutional application of those facts where such application is at issue. If,
for example, MOP determined that a speaker at Revoice 18 taught that the
world is flat, we would have to defer to that finding of fact regarding what was
taught unless the Record of the Case contained clear and direct evidence that
the speaker taught otherwise. But if MOP also determined that flat-earth
teaching is consistent with our Constitution, we would be free to apply our
own abilities and understanding to determining whether that is the case. I
greatly regret that the Court did not examine each specification of error
concerning our appropriate standard of review, as I believe it would have
provided a more credible path to the Court’s result, a result with which I might
have been able to concur as to MOP Theological Judgments 2, 4 and 5.




                                      849
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Analysis of the Complainant’s Six Specifications of Error Concerning
the Theological Judgments of MOP

1. At its December 7, 2019, Called Meeting, did MOP err in approving six
   theological judgments (specifically, judgments #1-5 and #9) of CIM (the
   Committee to Investigate Memorial)?

A. MOP Theological Judgment 1 (“Origins of Homoerotic Desire”)

This specification involves a pure question of fact. Complainant objects to
MOP’s adoption of the judgment that “the evidence does not demonstrate the
allegation that Revoice 18 grounded homoerotic desire and actions in Creation
rather than in the Fall.” The only question at issue is where Revoice 18
grounded homoerotic desire and actions. If MOP were to argue that it is
permissible under our Constitution to ground homoerotic desire in Creation,
we would have a question of law to decide, but that is not the case. Thus,
absent clear error on MOP’s part established in the Record of the Case, this
Court should defer to MOP’s decision on this specification.

Complainant admits in his Complaint that “Revoice 18 speakers and writers
say plainly that homoerotic desires do not arise from creation but from the
Fall” (Complaint at 2) and that such speakers “clearly said (that it believes
homoerotic desire is sinful and grounded only in the Fall).” (Complaint at 3).
His argument is that the Revoice 18 speakers’ other teachings are inconsistent
with this theological position. In terms of our flat-earth analogy, having
admitted that the world is round, the speakers go on to assert the inconsistent
proposition that, if one sails too far, one will fall over the world’s edge.
Complainant raises valid questions about some of the arguments voiced at
Revoice 18, but, in my view, none sufficient to demonstrate clear error on the
part of MOP, especially since most, if not all, of Complainant’s arguments
were reasonably addressed in the CRC Report at pages 7-9.

B. MOP Theological Judgment 2 (“Terminology”)

This specification argues against the judgment that “terms like ‘gay,’ ‘sexual
orientation,’ ‘queer,’ ‘sexual minorities,’ etc., are not always or necessarily
unbiblical; and therefore that Revoice 18’s use of the terminology in question,
though confusing to some and potentially unwise, was not a grave and serious
doctrinal error.” There is no dispute over whether terms such as those listed
were used at Revoice 18; the only issue here is whether the use of such terms
is “always or necessarily unbiblical” when used as they were used at Revoice
                                     850
                                  APPENDIX T



18. That is a question of law under our Constitution; hence, no deference to
the lower court is required.

Complainant does not object in principle to the use of these terms by Christians
in all contexts, or as descriptors of specific sins or temptations to sin. His
argument is more specific. He stated in his Complaint that the use of these
terms at Revoice 18 necessarily carried with it “the underlying assumption of
some sort of intrinsic goodness inherent in the gay orientation. . . . [T]his
language of ‘gay Christian’ necessarily implies a proper and good quality of
‘gayness’ that could endure into Heaven itself.” To the extent that
Complainant’s argument is that speakers at Revoice 18 really meant more than
they said on the surface, it is an argument about facts and an area in which this
Court should defer to the lower court absent clear error in the Record of the
Case. But, as noted above, this issue is best classified as a question of law –
does the use of the terms in question, in the context in which they were used,
violate our Constitution? I would find that it does not, at least in the context
in which the terms were used in this case.

The problem is one of definition of terms. As the CRC Report explains, the
meaning of the term “gay” and other like terms when associated with
“Christian” differs from speaker to speaker. CRC Report at 12; see also
Appendix 2 to CRC Report. That meaning may even be shifting in the English
language. It seems apparent from the Record that different speakers at Revoice
18 may have intended different meanings in the use of these terms.
Complainant disagrees, arguing that that “[t]he Church has a right to
understand ‘gay’ and ‘LGBT’ and ‘sexual minority,’ etc., as referring to a
group of people who identify as such and live out this lifestyle” (emphasis
added). But Complainant cites no authority for the Church’s alleged right to
define these terms for the people using them.

This specification of error is really a conflation of issues raised in other
specifications of error. For example, the only specific instance cited in
Complainant’s brief of a speaker at Revoice 18 advancing a view that clearly
carries with it a problematic meaning for “gay” is the same instance used to
support Specification of Error 1.C. (The Gay Beneath the Gay). See
Complaint’s Brief at 3; see also subsection C. below. I believe that issue is
more properly dealt with in 1.C., which addresses it directly. His other
examples are from written works by Revoice 18 speakers, but they are not
from statements made at the conference. Those examples may inform
worrisome statements by those authors made at the conference, but
Complainant does not cite any such statements. But, setting all this aside and
                                      851
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



assuming for purposes of argument that some speakers at Revoice 18 used
terms like “gay” in a manner that violated our Constitution, it is not clear why
that is a problem. Surely the peace and purity of the church can withstand civil
discussion of a timely theological issue at a conference convened in part for
that purpose?

And yet, caution is certainly in order. The CRC Report expressed reservations
about the insufficiency of the wording of the judgment in its lack of caution
concerning the careful use of “gay” and like terms, and MOP followed the
CRC Report’s recommendation in adopting four general principles along with
the judgment to be utilized within the Presbytery when discussing these issues.
As expressed in the Report:

        1. Go overboard in defining your terms AND your beliefs
           about homosexual desires.
        2. Seek to employ the least controversial terms in the widest
           public settings.
        3. In general settings, such as a worship service, it may be
           best to refrain from using terminology that requires
           multiple layers of complex distinctions.
        4. Employ the full orbed principles of the weaker brother.

Minutes of the Stated Meeting of MOP (July 21, 2020), at 7. I commend these
principles along with this statement quoted in the CRC Report from the PCA’s
Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality:

        Nevertheless, we recognize that some Christians may use the
        term “gay” in an effort to be more readily understood by non-
        Christians. The word “gay” is common in our culture, and we
        do not think it wise for churches to police every use of the term.
        Our burden is that we do not justify our sin struggles by
        affixing them to our identity as Christians. Churches should
        be gentle, patient, and intentional with believers who call
        themselves “gay Christians,” encouraging them, as part of the
        process of sanctification, to leave behind identification
        language rooted in sinful desires, to live chaste lives, to refrain
        from entering into temptation, and to mortify their sinful
        desires.
        (Report of the PCA’s Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality,
        page 10, lines 12-19, as quoted in CRC Report at 12.)


                                      852
                                        APPENDIX T



Finally, implicit in this specification of error is the concept that Memorial
endorsed all the views taught or offered at Revoice 18, an argument made
explicit in Specification of Error 1.F. concerning the statements of a Roman
Catholic speaker at the conference. If Revoice 18 speakers had used terms like
“gay” in a manner that would violate our Constitution, Memorial’s primary
error would appear to be failing to warn its congregation that not all speakers
at the conference should be presumed to be reliable teachers of sound doctrine,
not necessarily in permitting the speakers to participate in the conference.

Although it is admittedly a close question, for the reasons explained above, I
would hold that Complainant has failed to demonstrate that the use of the terms
in question at Revoice 18 violates our Constitution.

C. MOP Theological Judgment 3 (“The Gay Beneath the Gay”)

This specification takes issue with MOP’s judgment that “the evidence was
such that this question as to whether a ‘gay beneath the gay’ exists could not
have been judged to be a key teaching of Revoice, but continues to have the
potential for becoming a grave and serious error if it begins to play a more
central role, and thus we exhort those involved with Revoice to consider our
position on this matter.” Like the first specification, this one involves a pure
question of fact – is there sufficient evidence in the Record of the Case to
support MOP’s judgment that the existence of a “gay beneath the gay” was not
a key teaching of Revoice 18? I would find that such evidence exists. As
explained in the CRC Report, only one Revoice 18 speaker could be found to
broach this subject directly, and even she may not be an advocate of the view.
CRC Report at 16-17. Complainant believes this view underlies much of what
was taught at Revoice 18, but MOP concluded otherwise, and Complainant
has failed to show that MOP committed clear error in doing so. Thus, I would
defer to MOP’s conclusions on this issue.62
D. MOP Theological Judgment 4 (“Gay Identity”)

62
     This specification of error is in some sense the opposite side of the coin that is
     specification of error 1.A. If same-sex attraction were grounded in Creation and not
     the Fall (a view inconsistent with our Constitution), then presumably the positive
     attributes associated with it could be celebrated as the “gayness beneath the gay.”
     In that sense, specifications 1.A. and 1.D. are the same. Said differently, a theory
     of the “gay beneath the gay” would likely violate our standards because same-sex
     attraction is grounded in the Fall, not in Creation. But Missouri found that a positive
     creational view of “gay beneath the gay” was not taught at Revoice 18, and I do not
     see sufficient factual evidence in the Record of the Case to reverse that factual
     finding.
                                             853
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



This specification argues against MOP’s judgment that it is not a grave and
serious error “to claim something which can be traced to our sin nature as in
any sense a part of our ‘identity,’ of [sic] part of ‘who we are,’ as Revoice does
with being [same-sex attracted].” The judgment also included the following
statement of application: “[T]he core question is not: ‘Is that which rises from
sin part of who you are?’ but rather: ‘What are you doing with all the broken
parts and places of who you are?’” Like the second specification, this one
raises a constitutional question, not a factual question. There is no real dispute
over whether some Revoice 18 speakers and teachers used terms like “gay” as
an identity marker.

Not surprisingly, nothing in our Constitution prohibits a Christian, in any
circumstance, from making known that he or she is persistently tempted by a
particular sin. Complainant’s argument, of course, goes deeper, and says that
use of terms like “gay” in connection with one’s identity “describ[es] or
modif[ies] his Christian identity.” Complaint at 7. The core of the argument
is that the label being used describes not only the particular Christian, but
Christianity’s moral doctrine concerning same-sex attraction. “I am gay, and
I am a Christian,” or its equivalent, according to the argument, always and
necessarily becomes an affirmation of same-sex attraction (as opposed to
same-sex sexual activity) as a morally neutral characteristic of some people.
Complainant’s comparisons to a physical handicap like blindness illustrate this
point; Complainant (reasonably) objects to comparing same-sex attraction to
a morally neutral condition like blindness because same-sex attraction is not
morally neutral. I agree with Complainant on this point; same-sex attraction
and blindness are not morally equivalent. However, although it is a close
question on which there is room for disagreement, I do not agree that the
Record of the Case supports the conclusion that the use of terms like “gay” as
an identifier at Revoice 18 necessarily implies that the conference speakers
and teachers hold or endorse a morally neutral view of same-sex attraction.63

As with Specification of Error I.B. (Terminology), it appears that, if and to the
extent that any speakers at Revoice 18 did teach a morally neutral view of
same-sex attraction, Memorial’s error was one of failing to caution its
congregation about the likelihood of heterodox views being taught at the
63
     It is possible that I would reach a different conclusion on this issue if I listened to
     all the presentations made at Revoice 18, which I have not done. As RE Donahoe’s
     concurring opinion points out, under our rules, the Court’s decisions are to be made
     solely on the bases of what is contained in the Record of the Case, and neither
     recordings nor transcripts of the Revoice 18 presentations were contained within the
     record, although excerpts were quoted.
                                             854
                                   APPENDIX T



conference, not necessarily the sponsorship of the conference. But, as with
I.B., I would not reach that issue, because I do not agree that it violates our
Constitution “to claim something which can be traced to our sin nature as in
any sense a part of our ‘identity,’ of [sic] part of ‘who we are,’” at least not as
those concepts were expressed at Revoice 18 as reflected in the Record of the
Case.

E. MOP Theological Judgment 5 (“Spiritual Friendship”)

This specification contends that MOP erred in concluding that Revoice 18 did
not teach “that ‘quasi-romantic’ kinds of relationships are legitimate before
God as long as explicitly sexual lines are not crossed” and in concluding that
Revoice 18’s “entertaining publicly the possibility of celibate partnerships
(and thereby implicitly commending them, even if unintentionally)” was an
error of judgment rather than an error of doctrine. A key statement in this
judgment was that “Memorial PC, through its pastor, TE Johnson, adequately
warned in his Revoice 18 talk – and does generally, in his pastoral counsel –
about the danger of friendships morphing into romances, stressing the
importance of boundaries.” Complainant stresses the same dangers as
Memorial and TE Johnson – the obvious peril of allowing a close personal
relationship, particularly a one-on-one relationship, between two persons who
are or may be sexually attracted to one another to become a sexual relationship.
He points to Revoice 18 speakers who dwelt on the relationships recorded in
the Bible between Ruth and Naomi, David and Jonathan, and Jesus and John
as the basis for pledges of friendship between people attracted to the same sex.
Complainant’s Brief at 6-7. In Complainant’s words, “This dangerous
teaching encouraged lonely men and women to take fire into their bosoms –
will they not be burned (Proverbs 6:27)?” Complaint at 8.

The wording of this judgment points toward a reading of it as a factual
judgment, not a determination of law, as it focuses on what “Revoice leaders
or speakers at Revoice 18 have taught.” However, I see no real dispute over
what was said at Revoice 18 on this topic. The real dispute is over whether
what was said, which all parties appear to agree was unwise at times and ran
the risk of leading people astray, rises to the level of a constitutional violation.
Complainant believes that it does, but MOP judged that the statements were
errors of judgment, not doctrine. Although it is a close question, I would agree
with MOP, primarily because our Constitution plainly does not prohibit close
personal relationships between members of the same sex, and it does not
contain a carve-out along the lines of “except for gay people.” The wisdom of
focusing on the Biblical examples of these relationships at a conference like
                                        855
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Revoice 18, particularly without qualifying cautions, is a very different issue,
as Memorial, TE Johnson, MOP, and Complainant all appear to appreciate.
But that is not the issue before us. Just because something is a bad idea (or is
executed in an unwise manner) does not make it a violation of our Constitution.

F. MOP Theological Judgment 9 (“Roman Catholic Speakers”).

This specification rejects MOP’s judgment that “although Memorial erred in
failing to make clear to their congregation our doctrinal differences with
Roman Catholicism before and after the Revoice 18 conference, it did not err
in allowing Roman Catholics to speak in their church building under the aegis
of Revoice, an outside organization . . . .” This issue presents a pure
constitutional question – may a PCA church allow a Roman Catholic to speak
in its church building in a context like the Revoice 18 conference?
Complainant provides a description of that context:

        When a church hosts a conference, advertises that conference
        amongst its membership, calls one of the conference speakers
        to fill its pulpit on the following Lord’s Day, and agrees to have
        its own senior pastor speaks [sic] at that conference, the host
        church is commending that conference to its members. This
        necessarily implies that the speakers at this conference are
        generally trustworthy and orthodox speakers.

Complaint at 10. I agree with Complainant’s first sentence. It is not credible
to argue that Memorial did not commend Revoice 18 to its members. I do not
necessarily reject the second sentence, unless the church explains to its
members in some reasonable fashion that one or particular speakers, or
possibly all of them except for the church’s senior pastor and other named
speakers, should not be uncritically considered as generally trustworthy and
orthodox. For example, a church might host a conference on serving the needs
of the poor and invite speakers with varying backgrounds and perspectives,
including unbelievers and Marxists. But a reasonable caution of some kind to
the church’s membership would be in order. That is precisely what MOP said
in its judgment – “Memorial erred in failing to make clear to their congregants
our doctrinal differences with Roman Catholicism before and after the Revoice
18 conference.” I take no position on exactly how such cautions should be
communicated, as that will differ according to time and place. But I agree with
MOP that Memorial erred in this way.
Complainant does not appear to be arguing (and the Court’s opinion should
not be interpreted to hold) that no Roman Catholic may speak in a PCA church
                                      856
                                   APPENDIX T



building under any circumstances. His objection is limited to the context of
this particular conference. He emphasizes the particular relevance of the
Roman Catholic doctrine of concupiscence, the teaching that the appetite for
sin, although the effect of sin, is not itself sinful unless consented to and acted
upon. At least one Roman Catholic Revoice 18 speaker apparently
characterized this view as a “traditional Christian ethic.” Obviously, in light
of the other issues already discussed in this opinion, the Roman Catholic
doctrine of concupiscence (which is contradicted by our Constitution (see, e.g.,
WCF 35; WSC 18; James 1:14-15)) could be used to support a morally neutral
view of same-sex attraction. I believe this danger illustrates the need MOP
identified for the importance of a session making its congregation aware that
non-PCA views will likely be presented at a conference being hosted by the
church. I do not believe that it compels us to conclude that Memorial violated
our Constitution by hosting Revoice 18 or that MOP did so through this
judgment.

I am particularly troubled by the Court’s cumulative approach as it attaches to
this issue. Were the Court’s opinion to be read too broadly, it could easily be
misunderstood to prohibit any Roman Catholic from ever addressing a group
of people in a PCA church building on any matter of faith. I do not believe
that is at all what the Court intends, but I also believe that, had the Court
considered each specification of error individually, it would have answered
this one in the negative.

A Note on the Court’s Amends

Although I dissent from the Court’s decision, I am not troubled by the Amends
required by the Court, which fall well short of Complainant’s requested
prosecution of TE Greg Johnson and Memorial. Complaint at 14. The
Amends focus on MOP’s responsibility to “make clear to the broader Church
the errors that were identified in Presbytery’s various investigations with
regard to some of the teachings at Revoice 18.” All parties appear to agree
that there were errors taught at Revoice 18, and additional clarity regarding
those errors should benefit us all. I am hopeful that MOP’s efforts in response
to the Court’s decision will contribute to the peace and purity of the Church.

This dissenting opinion was written by RE John D. Pickering and joined by
joined by TE David F. Coffin, Jr.




                                       857
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                           DISSENTING OPINION
                           of TE David F. Coffin, Jr.

I dissent from the decision of the Standing Judicial Commission (SJC) to
sustain the above cited Complaint in Issue 1.

The SJC sustained the Complaint in Issue 1, in part, because of the
Commission’s objection to the significant error made by CIM at the outset of
their investigation, an error acquiesced in by Presbytery in their reception of
CIM’s report.

CIM was assigned to undertake a BCO 31-2 investigation of TE Greg Johnson
and a BCO 40-5 investigation of the Session of Memorial. The standard
governing such investigations are clearly set forth in each: BCO 31-2, whether
the investigation discovers “a strong presumption of guilt” with respect to
“reports affecting their Christian character”; BCO 40-5, whether the
investigation discovers “any important delinquency or grossly unconstitutional
proceedings”. However CIM believed that the BCO implicitly allowed the
Committee to set aside the standards above and put in place a standard of their
own invention. That is to say, CIM took a standard treating the censure of
deposition at the conclusion of a guilty verdict at trial in BCO 34-5, i.e., “errors
[that] . . . strike at the vitals of religion and are industriously spread,” and made
that the standard for their pre-trial investigation of both TE Johnson and the
Memorial Session. This was a profound error, and would have led to harmful
consequences, had it not been for Missouri’s subsequent deliberations in the
matter, which largely abandoned the CIM invention in favor of the appropriate
BCO standards as set forth above.

That being granted, the SJC had no right to sustain the Complaint on an issue
never raised by the Complainant. BCO 39-3.1. plainly states: “A higher court,
reviewing a lower court, should limit itself to the issues raised by the parties
to the case in the original (lower) court.” No party raised the issue of CMI’s
error, certainly not the Complainant. TE Speck was a member of CMI and
participated in its formulation of the erroneous standard. He never raised or
recorded an objection, in any of the many hearings before Presbytery or its
committees, but rather used the standard in his submissions, arguing that the
evidence for the Complaint showed the invented standard had been met. One
can see this, for example, in the text of the Complaint filed with Presbytery:

        MOP's consideration of the ClM Report's Judgments
        concluded with MOP re-affirming its positions on such areas
                                        858
                                  APPENDIX T



        as homosexuality, homosexual identity, and same-sex
        attraction, namely: “We do not believe that doctrinal positions
        contrary to the Scriptures and our confessional standards were
        advanced at Revoice 18. . . .” Complainant contends that MOP
        erred grievously in vindicating the teachings of Revoice 18,
        errors that strike at the vitals of religion and will cause
        significant harm to the peace and purity of the Church.
        [Emphasis added.]

The Record of the Case shows that every party to this case employed the faulty
standard multiple times without any hint of doubt as to its legitimacy.

Faced with this reasoning, in the SJC’s debate concerning its decision, an
argument was raised to counter it that was apparently persuasive. It was urged
that “should,” in the BCO, refers to a procedure that is highly recommended
and will ordinarily be followed, the exception being only in unusual
circumstances. On the other hand, it was alleged, “shall” in the BCO refers to
a required procedure that must be followed in every circumstance. In light of
this alleged interpretive rule, in debate on the substitute in this case, the SJC
was plausibly urged that BCO 39-3.1 says “should” rather than “shall,” and
therefore compliance was only a matter of wisdom, in most cases, but can be
set aside at will.

It might be nice if there were such a clear, handy, rule. Unfortunately, that rule
is in no place adopted and published in our governing documents, and in many
and important instances, the BCO does not “recognize” such a rule and uses
the word “should” in a well-established grammatical sense, a sense that can
only be discovered contextually, not by rule. Woodenly following the above-
mentioned rule would lead to disastrous misinterpretations of the Constitution
of the PCA.

One must remember that in the English language “should” is a modal verb that
is used for a variety of purposes: 1. giving advice, suggestion, or
recommendation; 2. predicting the future and talking about expectations; 3.
expressing an order, obligation, or instruction (e.g., “All visitors should pay
the fee beforehand.”); and 4. advising not to do something. The BCO of the
PCA regularly uses the word “should” in the third sense. A few important
instances will suffice to make the point. A helpful test is to consider, in its
context, whether “should” could be modified by “most often” and still preserve
the sense of the rule. Emphasis is added throughout.


                                       859
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           2-3. “It is according to scriptural example that the Church
           should be divided into many individual churches.”

           4-5. “Churches without teaching elders ought not to forsake the
           assembling of themselves together, but should be convened by
           the Session on the Lord's Day. . . .”

           5-2.c. “Should it become necessary, the Presbytery may
           dissolve the mission church. Church members enrolled should
           be cared for according to the procedures of 13-10.”

           5-9. “A new church can be organized only by the authority of
           Presbytery.”
                   a. A Presbytery should establish standing rules setting
           forth the prerequisites that qualify a mission church to begin
           the organization process. . . .”

           8-2. “He that fills this office should possess a competency of
           human learning and be blameless in life, sound in the faith and
           apt to teach. He should exhibit a sobriety and holiness of life
           becoming the Gospel. He should rule his own house well and
           should have a good report of them that are outside the
           Church.”64

           11-4. “For the orderly and efficient dispatch of ecclesiastical
           business, it is necessary that the sphere of action of each court
           should be distinctly defined. . . .”

           12-1. “if there is only one ruling elder, he does not constitute a
           Session, but he should take spiritual oversight of the church,
           should represent it at Presbytery, should grant letters of

64
     N.B.: The BCO, in paraphrasing 1 Tim. 3:2–4, is using “should” for “must”: “2
     Therefore an overseer must be above reproach, [must be] the husband of one
     wife, [must be] sober-minded, [must be] self-controlled, [must be] respectable, [must
     be] hospitable, [must be] able to teach, 3 not a drunkard, not violent but gentle, not
     quarrelsome, not a lover of money. 4 He must manage his own household well, with
     all dignity keeping his children submissive. . . . 7 Moreover, he must be well thought
     of by outsiders. . . .” [ESV; emphasis added]. Would our BCO be worded to relax
     the standard of Scripture? Of course not! It is using the word “should” in the
     perfectly acceptable grammatical sense of expressing an order, obligation, or
     instruction.
                                             860
                         APPENDIX T



dismission, and should report to the Presbytery any matter
needing the action of a Church court. . . .”

14-1.11. “Each alternate should attend each meeting and fill
any vacancy necessary to meet a quorum.”

16-3. “. . . And it is indispensable that, besides possessing the
necessary gifts and abilities, natural and acquired, every one
admitted to an office should be sound in the faith, and his life
be according to godliness.”

19-7. “. . . The nature of the internship shall be determined by
the Presbytery, but it should involve the candidate in full scope
of the duties of any regular ministerial calling approved by the
Presbytery. . . .”

20-2. “Every church should be under the pastoral oversight of
a minister, and when a church has no pastor it should seek to
secure one without delay. . . .”

21-4.b. “In all cases, he should be asked to indicate whether he
has changed his previous views concerning any points in the
Confession of Faith, Catechisms, and Book of Church Order
of the Presbyterian Church in America. . . .”

24-1. “Every church shall elect persons to the offices of ruling
elder and deacon in the following manner: At such times as
determined by the Session, communicant members of the
congregation may submit names to the Session, keeping in
mind that each prospective officer should be an active male
member who meets the qualifications set forth in 1 Timothy 3
and Titus 1.”

34-3. “If any one knows a minister to be guilty of a private
offense, he should warn him in private. But if the offense be
persisted in, or become public, he should bring the case to the
attention of some other minister of the Presbytery.”

35-6. “. . . If, however, at any time a witness should present
himself before a court, who for conscientious reasons prefers


                              861
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       to swear or affirm in any other manner, he should be allowed
       to do so.”

All this notwithstanding, the crucial instances for this Dissent are found
throughout BCO 39-3.

       39-3. “. . . To insure that this Constitution is not amended,
       violated or disregarded in judicial process, any review of the
       judicial proceedings of a lower court by a higher court shall be
       guided by the following principles:
           1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should limit
                itself to the issues raised by the parties to the case in
                the original (lower) court. Further, the higher court
                should resolve such issues by applying the
                Constitution of the church, as previously established
                through the constitutional process.
           2. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
                deference to a lower court regarding those factual
                matters which the lower court is more competent to
                determine, because of its proximity to the events in
                question, and because of its personal knowledge and
                observations of the parties and witnesses involved.
                Therefore, a higher court should not reverse a factual
                finding of a lower court, unless there is clear error on
                the part of the lower court.
           3. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great
                deference to a lower court regarding those matters of
                discretion and judgment which can only be addressed
                by a court with familiar acquaintance of the events and
                parties. Such matters of discretion and judgment
                would include, but not be limited to: the moral
                character of candidates for sacred office, the
                appropriate censure to impose after a disciplinary trial,
                or judgment about the comparative credibility of
                conflicting witnesses. Therefore, a higher court should
                not reverse such a judgment by a lower court, unless
                there is clear error on the part of the lower court.
           4. The higher court does have the power and obligation
                of judicial review, which cannot be satisfied by always
                deferring to the findings of a lower court. Therefore, a
                higher court should not consider itself obliged to
                                     862
                                        APPENDIX T



                     exhibit the same deference to a lower court when the
                     issues being reviewed involve the interpretation of the
                     Constitution of the Church. Regarding such issues, the
                     higher court has the duty and authority to interpret and
                     apply the Constitution of the Church according to its
                     best abilities and understanding, regardless of the
                     opinion of the lower court.

To relieve the reader from a proliferation of needless argumentation, I will
simply assert, without fear of contradiction, that this Court has, with perfect
consistency, interpreted “should” in this provision, to have the sense of “must.”
With respect to principles 2 and 3 the Court has repeatedly noted that under
these standards the higher court is required to defer unless there is a showing
of clear error.

However, a close reading of principle 1 is demonstrative: “A higher court,
reviewing a lower court, should [most often?] limit itself to the issues raised
by the parties to the case in the original (lower) court. Further, the higher court
should [most often?] resolve such issues by applying the Constitution of the
church, as previously established through the constitutional process.” Clearly
such a construction in the second part of the principle would lead to a profound
failure to grasp our Constitutional order. Just as clearly, the sense of the word
does not shift in the two sentences. In each case, contextually, “should” can
only be properly construed as “must.”65

Thus it is that, for what were doubtless the best of intentions, the SJC violated
the BCO in its decision to sustain the above cited Complaint in Issue 1. It is
hard to overstate the importance of BCO 39-3.1. in its requirement that the SJC
“limit itself to the issues raised by the parties to the case in the original (lower)
court.” Before this provision was adopted, it was possible for judges to raise
matters unrelated to the issues brought before the court, and thus use the case
to advance, not the litigant’s, but their own favored causes. This possibility
was a serious threat to the integrity of the SJC as an appellate court. In my

65
     Of course nothing asserted in this interpretation relieves an appellate court from the
     responsibility to enforce the obligations of the Rules of Disciple with respect to
     appellate proceedings and dismissing a case for failure to comply. These are formal
     issues that belong to the prerogatives of the appellate court, that in the nature of the
     case could not be raised by the parties, as compared to the material issues as raised
     by the parties, that limit the appellate court’s consideration. For the SJC these formal
     issues are addressed in the Court’s responsibility to consider whether a case is
     Administratively or Judicially in order.
                                              863
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



judgment all members of the court must be vigilant to protect and uphold this
principle.

Further, I note that the Complaint, in each of the specifications of Issue 1, is
alleging specific doctrinal errors. The Panel’s recommended decision asserted
that each of those doctrinal errors were not proven from the ROC (with
evidence from the Panel proposed in each instance), and thus denied the
complaint. A substitute for the Panel’s recommendation in Issue 1 sustained
the complaint, ostensibly with respect to the doctrinal errors alleged, but it
does not even address the enumerated errors. Upon the adoption of the
substitute sustaining the Complaint, the SJC, without providing evidence, by
implication declared that the doctrinal errors alleged are proven. In fact, the
SJC’s reasoning addresses only a number of instances where the presbytery
grants that there were problems with Revoice teaching. But this evidence,
however certainly available in the Record of the Case, simply does not sustain
the Complaint as set forth in Issue 1. It does sustain another complaint that
might have been, but was not, in fact, before the court.66

This dissenting opinion was written by TE David F. Coffin, Jr. and joined by
RE John D. Pickering.


                     CASE NO. 2021-03
           COMPLAINT OF RE DONAVON. J. DEJONG
                            v.
     SESSION OF VILLAGE SEVEN PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
                 DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                       March 3, 2022

I. CASE SUMMARY

This case came before the SJC on the Complaint of RE Donavon J. (DJ)
DeJong against the Session of his church, Village Seven Presbyterian Church
(V7PC) in Colorado Springs, Colorado, within the Rocky Mountain
Presbytery (RMP). At issue are changes made to the governing structure and
procedures of V7PC.


66
  For a full discussion and persuasive defense of this point, see RE Pickering’s dissent,
in which I join.


                                          864
                              APPENDIX T



The case was heard by the Panel on November 11, 2021, via GoToMeeting.
RE DeJong appeared with his assistant, TE Dominic Aquila. TE Stephen
Reese appeared as RMP’s representative. This Complaint was subsequently
sustained in part and denied in part by the SJC.

II. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

06/12/2018    The Session of V7PC appointed an Elder Job Description
              Committee (EJDC).

02/10/2020    The EJDC presented its report to the Session of V7PC.

03/09/2020    The Session of V7PC adopted three motions presented by the
              EJDC, amending two of those motions.

04/13/2020    The Session of V7PC adopted as amended the fourth motion
              presented by the EJDC.

05/06/2020    RE DeJong filed a Complaint against the actions of the
              Session of V7PC taken on March 9, 2020 and April 13, 2020

05/11/2020    The Session of V7PC denied the Complaint.

06/12/2020    RE DeJong carried his Complaint to RMP.

01/04/2021    The Shepherding Committee of RMP, acting as a Commission
               of RMP, heard the Complaint.

01/28/2021    RMP “approve[ed] the RMP commission’s ruling … to deny
              the complaint.”

02/18/2021    RE DeJong carried his Complaint to the General Assembly.

09/22/2021    The SJC Panel conducted a hearing on objections to the
              Record of the Case, ruled on the objections, and finalized the
              Record of the Case.

11/11/2021    The SJC Panel heard oral arguments via GoToMeeting. The
              Panel included TE Fred Greco (Chairman), RE Dan Carrell,
              and TE Paul Kooistra, with RE Sam Duncan (Secretary) and
              TE Guy Prentiss Waters attending as alternates.
                                   865
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



III. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

    1. Did Presbytery err when it denied a Complaint against an action of the
       V7PC Session that proposed a V7PC bylaw change removing the
       restriction against a ruling elder who has served two consecutive terms
       from serving further until at least one year has elapsed?
    2. Did Presbytery err when it denied a Complaint against an action of the
       V7PC Session that erected a Judicial Commission of the Session to
       function in accordance with the document “Village Seven Judicial
       Commission”?
    3. Did Presbytery err when it denied a Complaint against an action of the
       V7PC Session that erected a Governance Commission of the Session
       to function in accordance with the document “Village Seven
       Governance Commission”?

IV. JUDGMENT

    1. No.
    2. No.
    3. Yes, and the Session’s action on the 3rd motion is annulled.

V. REASONING AND OPINION

On March 9, 2020, the EJDC presented four motions to the V7PC Session. On
that date, Session adopted three of those motions. The first motion was to adopt
a “Ruling Elder Job Description as amended” The second motion was to
“recommend to the congregation” a bylaw change to remove the restriction
against a ruling elder who has served two consecutive three-year terms, full or
partial, from serving further until at least one year has elapsed. The third
motion (adopted with amendments) was to erect a “Governance Commission
(per BCO chapter 15) to oversee the governance of Village Seven Presbyterian
Church (as described in BCO 12-5) in accord with the document called
‘Village Seven Governance Commission.’” On April 13, 2020, the Session
adopted with amendments the fourth of the committee’s motions. That motion
was to “adopt [the] document describing our Judicial Commission.”

The Complainant contends that the Session was correct when it adopted the
first motion, but erred when it adopted the second, third, and fourth motions.
In particular, the Complainant contends that these latter three motions were
not only in “contradiction” to the first motion, but also “contrary to … the PCA
Constitution.” Complainant reasons that Presbytery, therefore, should have
                                      866
                                 APPENDIX T



sustained the Complaint and annulled Session’s actions on the second, third,
and fourth motions. We will address in turn the Complainant’s claims with
respect to each of these motions.

The first motion as adopted reads, “The role of the Ruling Elder at Village
Seven Presbyterian Church, according to a comprehensive and Biblical and
Book of Church Order understanding is that of governance and shepherding.
The Complainant has not demonstrated that the second motion conflicts with
the first. There is nothing inherently incompatible between this statement of
the work of the elder and eliminating the requirement of a year off the Session
after serving two consecutive terms. Furthermore, the Complainant has not
demonstrated a constitutional conflict. The Constitution is silent on the matter
of terms of office, neither prescribing nor proscribing terms. With respect to
terms of office, the particular proposal envisioned by this action of Session is
constitutionally permissible and unobjectionable.

We also fail to see any constitutional conflict in erecting through the fourth
motion a Judicial Commission to function in accordance with the document
“Village Seven Judicial Commission.” The Constitution makes express
provision for judicial commissions of Presbytery (BCO 15-3) and of General
Assembly (BCO 15-4, 5), and there is no constitutional barrier to a Session
erecting a judicial commission. Furthermore, although the document “Village
Seven Judicial Commission” authorizes a separate commission (the
“Governance Commission”) to present annually a slate of nominees for the
Judicial Commission, that slate is presented to the Session. It is the Session
that “shall elect one RE per year from a slate of nominees presented by the
GC. The Senior Pastor shall present the initial slate of nominees to the Session
for election.” Therefore, one may not fairly characterize this provision as
“demot[ing]” or “disenfranchise[ing]” the ruling elders of V7PC, because it is
the Session and not a commission thereof that determines the membership of
its Judicial Commission.

Finally, the Complainant alleges that Session erred when it amended and
adopted the third motion in order to erect a Governance Commission of the
V7PC Session to function in accordance with the document “Village Seven
Governance Commission.” The Complainant contends that this Governance
Commission deprives Session members who are not part of the GC of their
“responsibility to govern” as members of Session. But the Constitution
provides for commissions of church courts and places no barrier to such
commissions executing matters relating to governance. The Complainant also
objected because the GC was erected as a standing commission, and the
                                      867
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Complainant contends that BCO 15-2 requires a commission to be “dissolved
automatically when the task is completed.” But there is no constitutional
barrier to a court erecting a standing commission. The “matters that may be
properly executed by commissions,” listed in BCO 15-2, are representative and
not exhaustive (“Among the matters that may be properly executed by
commissions are ....”;emphasis added). The Complainant therefore has not
identified a constitutional barrier to a governance commission as such.

Nevertheless, the document “Village Seven Governance Commission”
adopted by Session does contain two constitutionally objectionable provisions.
In the section delineating the GC’s “Role,” Item 6 reads, “The GC shall work
to govern through policy. The GC will be accountable to ensure policy/
position/philosophy statements are created when needed, organized for
reference, and updated with each change.” This provision is broad, sweeping,
and general in setting forth the scope of the GC’s responsibilities. As such, it
does not meet the standard of BCO 15-1 (“a commission is authorized to
deliberate upon and conclude the business referred to it ....”), which limits a
commission to the particular business referred to it by the court. This provision
adopted by Session is sufficiently broad to permit the GC to function as the
Session itself. In addition, Item 4 in the GC document stipulates:

        4. The GC shall refer decisions regarding the calling of pastors
        and senior level staff, capital campaigns, incurring of new
        debt, anything that would go to the whole congregation for a
        vote, and the approval of officer candidates, deacon assistants,
        and Shepherd Team members, to the entire Session for a vote.

This provision permits the GC to function like a session, with the V7 Session
functioning like a commission for the specific items mentioned in Item 4.
However, in the relationship between a commissioning body and its
commission, the power to refer (to delegate authority) should be reversed. A
session should refer specific business to its commission, and reserve the
remainder to itself, rather than vice versa. These two provisions adopted by the
Session permit the GC to function like the Session itself. As such it extends
beyond the limits the Constitution sets for an ecclesiastical commission.

Contrast the Session’s creation of its Judicial Commission. The adopted
document, “Village Seven Judicial Commission,” makes explicit that the
Judicial Commission “shall adjudicate all cases of process,” and then proceeds
to define a case of process. As such, this provision meets the constitutional
standard that “a commission is authorized to deliberate upon and conclude the
                                      868
                                 APPENDIX T



business referred to it ….” (BCO 15-1). In the motion it adopted, Session
clearly delineated what business would be referred to this particular
commission.

Presbytery erred when it did not sustain the Complaint challenging the
formation a governance commission to operate in accordance with the
document “Village Seven Governance Commission.” Session’s action on its
third motion therefore is annulled. This annulment, however, in no way
precludes V7PC Session from refining its document to avoid constitutional
infirmity.

This decision was written by TE Guy Waters and revised and approved by the
Panel and adopted/amended by the full SJC on the following roll call vote:

      Bankson Concur        M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur           S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Disqual.
      Cannata Concur        Ellis Concur                 Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur        Greco Concur                 Ross Concur
      Chapell Concur        Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur         Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur        Lucas Concur                 White Concur
      Dowling Concur        McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (23-0-0)


                        CASE NO. 2021-07
                      RE J. LANCE ACREE
                              VS.
                 TENNESSEE VALLEY PRESBYTERY
                         COMPLAINT
                          March 3, 2022

This case began as an attempt by a Ruling Elder to file a BCO 43-1 Complaint
with Presbytery as the original court, even though he was not a commissioner
at the Presbytery meeting where the action was taken. The Officers reviewed
the Complaint and recommended the Case be found Administratively Out of
Order. (OMSJC 9.1.a) The Officers determined that the Case could not be put
in order (OMSJC 9.2), because the Complainant was not identified in the roster
of Ruling Elder Commissioners at the April 2021 meeting of the Presbytery in
which the action was taken from which his Complaint arises. The Presbytery
Clerk confirmed he was not a commissioner at that meeting. The Officers
                                     869
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



notified RE Acree that they were making this recommendation to the SJC.
Therefore, the SJC rules the Complainant did not have standing to file a BCO
43-1 complaint with Presbytery. Presbytery should have also found his
Complaint out of order and declined to adjudicate at its July 2021 meeting.
See similar SJC rulings on standing in:

        Case 2020-13, Benyola v. Central Florida, (M48GA, 2021, p. 817),
        Case 2020-01, Benyola v. Central Florida (M48GA, 2021, p. 801),
        Case 2013-08, RE Warren Jackson v. Northwest Georgia (M43GA,
                2015, p. 568),
        Case 2012-06, Deacon Don Bethel v. Southeast Alabama (M41GA,
                2013, p. 614), and
        Case 92-9b, Mr. Overman v. Eastern Carolina (M21GA, 1993, p. 223).

      Bankson Concur        M. Duncan Concur           Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur           S. Duncan Concur           Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur        Ellis Concur               Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur        Greco Concur               Ross Concur
      Chapell Disqual.      Kooistra Concur            Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur         Lee Concur                 Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur        Lucas Concur               White Concur
      Dowling Concur        McGowan Concur             Wilson Concur
      (23-0-0)


                   CASE NO. 2021-08
                 IN THE MATTER OF
    KOREAN SOUTHWEST ORANGE COUNTY PRESBYTERY
                     March 3, 2022

The SJC cited Korean Southwest Orange County Presbytery (KSWOC) to
appear at the March 3, 2022 Stated Meeting in Case No. 2021-08, unless the
Presbytery provided satisfactory responses in writing by January 14, 2022 to
part (d) of the RPR Report presented to the 2021 General Assembly in the
review of Presbytery’s records.

The SJC has not yet received a response adopted by Korean Southwest Orange
County Presbytery. We understand the Presbytery did not have a Stated
Meeting scheduled between the SJC’s October 21, 2021 Decision and the
SJC’s March 3, 2022 meeting. We appreciate that the Presbytery’s Clerk has


                                    870
                                 APPENDIX T



provided the SJC with draft responses he plans to recommend to KSWOC at
its Stated Meeting on March 22, 2022, regarding the General Assembly’s 23
exception-of-substance citations from 2015-2018. Assuming Presbytery files
its adopted responses by April 1, 2022, the SJC will forward them promptly to
the General Assembly Committee on Review of Presbytery Records for RPR
to consider at its June Stated Meeting. If Presbytery does not file its adopted
responses by April 1, the SJC will cite Presbytery to appear at a called SJC
meeting for an OMSJC 15.4 hearing, on a date prior to the 49th General
Assembly (which commences June 21, 2022). The decision was approved on
the following roll call vote:
      Bankson Concur         M. Duncan Concur             Neikirk Concur
      Bise Concur            S. Duncan Concur             Nusbaum Concur
      Cannata Concur         Ellis Concur                 Pickering Concur
      Carrell Concur         Greco Concur                 Ross Concur
      Chapell Not qual.      Kooistra Concur              Terrell Concur
      Coffin Concur          Lee Concur                   Waters Concur
      Donahoe Concur         Lucas Concur                 White Concur
      Dowling Concur         McGowan Concur               Wilson Concur
      (23-0-0)

      IV. AMENDMENTS TO SJC OPERATING MANUAL
The Commission recommends adoption of the following amendments to its
Operating Manual. (New provisions indicated by underlining; provisions to
be removed indicated by strike.):
A. That OMSJC 2.6 be amended as follows (underlining for additional
wording):
        2.6.    So long as he complies with Section 2.5 above, a
                member may make public or private statements in the
                course of his duties as a presbyter or Session member
                with respect to biblical teaching, confessional
                interpretation, the principles of the form of
                government and discipline, the requirements of the
                BCO, the Rules of Assembly Operation, Robert's
                Rules, and may explain Commission procedures. If
                such statements seem to the member especially liable
                to be construed to address a pending or impending
                matter before the Commission, a member making such
                public or private statements shall expressly qualify the
                statements indicating that they are limited to the

                                     871
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                 subject matters permitted by this subsection and are
                 not made with a view to any pending or impending
                 matter.

   Rationale: This addition does not broaden the speaking rights of SJC
   members. It simply adds a provision whereby a member who is already
   fully complying with OMSJC 2.5 must take this step in an effort to
   ensure his listeners and readers do not misconstrue his OMSJC 2.6
   statements in a way “that might reasonably be expected to affect the
   outcome of a pending matter or impending matter [of process] in any court
   of the church.” (OMSJC 2.5)

B. That OMSJC 18.12 be amended by the addition of (d) and (e) as follows:

       OMSJC 18.12
         (d)    Members may join in pending concurring or
                dissenting opinions at any time until the 14-day
                deadline to request the meeting described in
                OMSJC 18.12(c).

           (e)      No concurring or dissenting opinion shall be
                    circulated to anyone outside the SJC or the PCA
                    Clerk’s office, until the completion of the
                    procedure described in Section 18.12(c) or the
                    passage of the deadline established in 18.12(c) in
                    the event no such meeting is requested.

   Rationale: The Manual does not currently specify a time in which
   members may join in concurring or dissenting opinions. Similarly, the
   Manual does not direct the officers or staff as to when such opinions
   should be transmitted to the parties. This amendment provides an objective
   timeline for reviewing, finalizing, and distributing concurring and
   dissenting opinions. And, with the other amendments proposed below,
   these concurring and dissenting opinions would be released at the same
   time as the SJC decision, and along with it.

C. That OMSJC 17.8 be amended by the deletion of (h) and (j); the rewording
   of and addition to (k), and the relettering of i to h and of k to i:

       OMSJC 17.8
         g.     No change in wording.


                                     872
                              APPENDIX T



        (h)      After the vote on the decision on the whole, the
                 Chairman of the Commission will communicate
                 the judgment to the parties; and the Stated Clerk
                 shall mail a copy of the decision to the parties.
        (ih)     No change in wording.
        (j)      When a decision has been approved under this
                 Manual by the Full Commission, a copy thereof
                 shall be mailed immediately to the parties and
                 shall then be public.
        (ki)     After a decision has been reached by the Full
                 Commission, any member may file, within 14
                 days after the date the text of the decision is sent
                 by the Secretary to the members of the
                 Commission, a concurring or dissenting opinion,
                 which, if it conforms with the requirements of
                 OMSJC 18.12, shall be promptly sent to the
                 parties as an appendix to the decision shall be
                 included as an appendix to the opinion decision
                 when it is sent to the parties. The controlling
                 opinion decision and any concurring or dissenting
                 opinions shall be sent to the parties and released to
                 the public at the same time and only after the
                 procedures of OMSJC 18.12 have been
                 completed. (See also 17.2)

Rationale: The revision to (k) aligns this subsection with OMSJC 18.12
and mirrors the pattern of civil courts. More important, while agreeing that
the decision of the SJC should be privileged, it seems the parties and the
Church would benefit from getting the full expression of the views of the
members of the SJC at the same time. Because concurring or dissenting
opinions are currently published weeks later than the decision, the
additional opinions may be missed or treated as an afterthought, and the
later release may unfortunately have the effect of rekindling conflict or
uncertainty in the Church. Further, if there are differences of opinion
within the SJC, the Church should be able to know the basis of those in a
way that cannot happen simply by reporting the vote in the decision.
Finally, if, as 18.12.a notes, concurring and dissenting opinions are vital
to allow judges to declare and clear their consciences, it seems this is best
accomplished if the decision and opinions are all released together. This
would also, for example, ensure any SJC-adopted answer (18.12.c) would
accompany a dissenting opinion rather than follow several weeks later.


                                  873
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   This revision would ordinarily result in a five-week delay in the release of
   SJC decisions so they can be accompanied by any concurring or dissenting
   opinions, and be released together, rather than weeks apart as presently
   happens. If no concurring or dissenting opinions are filed, the delay would
   be reduced by two weeks. However, with the change proposed to OMSJC
   17.2 in Item D below, any SJC decision could be announced immediately
   to the parties if approved by 2/3 of the SJC voting members in such case.
   If the revision to (k) is adopted, it would void (h) and (j) and thus they
   would be stricken.
D. That OMSJC 17.2 be amended as follows:
       17.2    A judgment of the Standing Judicial Commission shall be
               effective from the time of its announcement to the parties in
               accordance with BCO 15-5(b) except in the case of a minority
               report in accordance with BCO 15-5(c). The Statement of the
               Issue and Judgment in Any SJC decision can be announced
               immediately to the parties if approved by 2/3 of voting
               members in such case. Otherwise, the Decision Issue and
               Judgment will not be announced until after the procedures of
               OMSJC 18.12 have been completed.
   Rationale: As described in the previous Rationale, the change to OMSJC
   17.8 in Item C above would ordinarily result in a five-week delay in the
   parties receiving the decision. However, in certain instances, like an
   appeal sustained in a case involving the censure of deposition, it might be
   wise and just to immediately release the decision, even though this would
   mean any concurring or dissenting opinions would need to follow later.

                   V. ELECTION OF OFFICERS
The Officers of the Standing Judicial Commission elected for 2022-2023 are
as follows:

       Chairman:                RE Jack Wilson
       Vice Chairman:           RE Sam Duncan
       Secretary:               RE Howie Donahoe
       Assistant Secretary:     TE Fred Greco

Respectfully submitted,
/s/ TE Fred Greco, Chairman         /s/ RE Sam Duncan, Secretary
/s/ RE John Bise, Vice-Chairman     /s/ RE Jack Wilson, Asst. Secretary


                                     874
                                 APPENDIX T



              SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT
      OF THE STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION
     TO THE FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
    OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA
                   June 20, 2022

                          I. INTRODUCTION

Since the completion of its original report to the 49th General Assembly, the
Standing Judicial Commission held two additional meetings: a video
conference called meeting on April 27, 2022 and a video conference called
meeting on June 2, 2022.


                         II. JUDICIAL CASES

The SJC submits this Supplemental Report of the decisions from its April 27,
2022 and June 2, 2022 called meetings. The cases are listed in the order in
which they were decided:

2021-09     Miller v. Ohio Valley Presbytery
2021-10     Williams v. Chesapeake Presbytery
2021-13     Dudt v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery
2021-06     Herron v. Central Indiana Presbytery
2022-01     Eagle, et al. v. Savannah River Presbytery

In addition, the Committee on Constitutional Business (CCB) requested the
SJC to provide a response regarding a request from a third party that CCB take
certain exceptions to the SJC’s minutes. The SJC’s response to that request of
CCB is included in this Supplemental Report.




                                     875
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        III. SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT OF THE CASES

                          CASE NO. 2021-09
                         GARY LEE MILLER
                                  v.
                     OHIO VALLEY PRESBYTERY
                      DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                            April 27, 2022

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

In December 2019, Grace and Peace PCA in Bellevue, Kentucky (near
Cincinnati) purchased a Lutheran Church building. Soon thereafter, Mr. Gary
Lee Miller, a member of Grace and Peace, requested in writing that certain
windows be removed, alleging they violated the Second Commandment.
Twelve months later, after discussions between the Session and Mr. Miller and
the Session’s decision not to remove any of the windows, he filed a Complaint
to the Session, which was denied. He carried that Complaint to the Presbytery,
which appointed a BCO 15-3 Commission to adjudicate it. Seven months later,
Presbytery’s Commission filed its report recommending Presbytery deny the
Complaint, and Presbytery adopted that recommendation by a vote of 25-0.
Mr. Miller carried that Complaint to the SJC, a Panel Hearing was held on
February 5, 2022, and the Panel later voted 3-0 to recommend the SJC deny
the Complaint.

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

12/30/19    Grace and Peace PCA purchased Prince of Peace Lutheran
            Church.

01/02/20    Mr. Miller emailed TE Lee Veazey, pastor of Grace and Peace,
            requesting that certain things be removed from the church
            building. Below are some excerpts.

                All of these [stained-glass] windows should be
                removed. Worship should be simple without pictures
                or images. However, two are profoundly perverse and
                disgusting. The first window on the left of the
                sanctuary, as one is facing the pulpit, depicts creation.
                It images God's hand reaching down to craft the
                worlds. ... The second window on the right of the
                                      876
                                APPENDIX T



               sanctuary, as one is facing the pulpit, depicts the seven
               spirits of God and images the Holy Spirit via a dove.
               ... I am aware [the] perverse image [of a painting of
               Christ kneeling] will be removed from the sanctuary.
               ... The pulpit should be center and higher than the
               people.”

01/03/20   TE Veazey responded to Mr. Miller’s email and forwarded the
           response to the other members of the Session (three ruling elders).

05/31/20   Grace & Peace held its ﬁrst public worship service in remodeled
           sanctuary.

07/04/20   Mr. Miller emailed his 12-page paper to RE Frey, titled “Position
           Paper - Against Imaging Any of the Three Persons of the Triune
           God.”

08/28/20   TE Veazey emailed various pastors and professors for counsel on
           the matter.

09/24/20   RE Frey emailed Mr. Miller’s 12-page position paper to the
           Session.

09/28/20   At the invitation of the Session, Mr. Miller attended a stated
           Session meeting to discuss his concerns regarding the stained-
           glass windows and his paper “Against Imaging.”

10/03/20   At a called meeting, the Session discussed “whether the images in
           the stained glass windows were a violation of the Second
           Commandment and whether they are in conflict with the
           Westminster Standards concerning images of the Godhead.” The
           Session considered the following question: “Do the images in the
           stained glass windows in the sanctuary need to be removed?” By
           a vote of 3-1, the Session adopted “No” as the answer. On this
           same day, Session Clerk RE Burkhard notified Mr. Miller of this
           decision by email, as shown below.

               Dear Lee, Thank you again for joining us this past
               Monday evening to provide additional and clarifying
               information on your position paper “Against Imaging
               Any of the Three Persons of the Triune God”. We are
                                     877
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



              grateful for your concern for the glory of God, the
              holiness of God, the keeping of the law of God, the
              love of Christ and the purity of the church. With that
              said, it is the decision of the Session that the images in
              the stained-glass windows are not in violation of the
              Second commandment. The windows do not serve as
              objects of worship nor are they used as aids in worship.
              Therefore, the images in the stained-glass windows do
              not need to be removed.

11/08/20   Mr. Miller approached RE Burkhard requesting a biblical
           response for keeping the images.

11/12/20   After two weeks of emails amongst Session members, Pastor
           Veazey, on behalf of the Session, sent a one-page letter to Mr.
           Miller, shown below.

              Dear Mr. Miller - Based on your ongoing discussions
              with a ruling elder and your recent meeting with
              another elder, it would appear that the communication
              to you from the session on Saturday, October 3, 2020,
              on the subject of stained-glass windows in the church
              building has not been well received. Therefore, in
              order to provide clarity and to conclude the matter, we
              offer the following comments.
                  We have studied and prayed individually as well
              as jointly well over 100 hours to receive instruction
              and wisdom from God’s Word. We have consulted
              over a dozen Presbyterian and Reformed pastors and
              scholars in order to better understand the biblical,
              theological, and pastoral issues involved. After much
              study, prayer, consultation, and discussion, the session
              reached the conclusion that the stained-glass windows
              in the church building do not contain images of the
              Triune God and thus are neither sinful (according to
              Scripture) nor violations of our doctrinal standards
              (according to the Westminster Confession of Faith and
              Catechisms). As a result, the images do not need to be
              removed nor will they be removed. The windows
              simply are decorative works of art in a church building
              that the Lord has graciously provided to our
                                    878
                                APPENDIX T



               congregation that together reflect biblical and church
               history through the time of the Reformation.
                   As for your desire to be given a biblical reason for
               the position of the session regarding the windows, it is
               not necessary. Here is what we mean. The position of
               the session is that the images in the windows are not
               images of God; therefore, they do not violate the
               Second Commandment and thus no further argument
               is needed or will be given.
                   In view of the concern you have brought to our
               attention, we remind you of your fifth membership
               vow to “submit [yourself] to the government and
               discipline of the Church”. We respect your conscience
               on this matter. If the decision and position of the
               leadership of the church on this matter causes you to
               believe that you will have to violate your conscience,
               it may be best for you and your family to find a local
               church where you can worship the Lord with a clear
               conscience and without distraction or hindrance.
               Please do not hesitate to let us know if we can be of
               assistance.

11/15/20   Mr. Miller spoke to TE Veazey to discuss the Session’s letter of
           11/12/20. Mr. Miller claimed the images at the front door show
           the intent to represent each person of the Trinity.

11/23/20   RE Livingston and TE Veazey met with Mr. Miller. Afterwards,
           the Session began discussing RE Livingston’s draft of a brief
           “Biblical and Confessional argument.”

12/04/20   As a follow-up to their Nov. 23 meeting, RE Livingston emailed
           Mr. Miller this clarification:

               The position of the Session was communicated to you
               by the clerk of the Session on October 3 and again by
               the pastor on behalf of the Session on November 12.
               Although I believe the communication of the Session’s
               position on October 3 was clear, we will consider the
               letter of November 12 to be the date of our notification
               to you of our decision in view of a timeline for a
               complaint.
                                    879
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



12/13/20   Mr. Miller filed a BCO 43-1 Complaint with the Session alleging
           the Session’s “failure to remove images in worship in violation of
           the Bible, the BCO, and the Westminster Standards ...” and the
           Complaint asked, “for the removal of all images.”

           The Record to the SJC included photographs of 14 different items.
           These were previously added to the Record that was reviewed by
           Presbytery’s Commission, at the Complainant’s request. At the
           SJC Panel Hearing, Complainant indicated he was referencing all
           14 items in his phrase “all images.” Items are listed below.

               3 etchings on clear glass in foyer/narthex
                   Hand with the word “Father”
                   Cross and Crown with the word “Son”
                   Dove with the word “Holy Ghost”
               2 banners - Alpha/Omega w/Titus 2:11, and three Circles
               w/Eph. 2:14
               9 stained-glass windows without any writing
                   Hand                      Blank Scroll
                   Tree                      Two Tablets w/ Numerals I-X
                   Dove                      XP (Chi Rho)
                   Heart                     Circle of Thorns & Three Nails
                   Red Thistle

01/11/21   At its next stated meeting, the Session discussed and then
           subsequently denied the Complaint, by a vote of 3-1. In addition,
           the Session adopted a two-page statement, titled “Why the
           Pictures in the Stained Glass Windows Are Not Images of the
           Triune God: A Brief Statement by the Session.”

01/12/21   Session Clerk RE Burkhard emailed Mr. Miller notifying him the
           Session had denied his Complaint, and Mr. Miller then
           carried/filed his complaint to Ohio Valley Presbytery the same
           day.

01/30/21   At Presbytery’s January Stated Meeting, a BCO 15-3 Judicial
           Commission was established to hear the case. Commission
           eventually met eight times.

06/08/21   The Commission conducted the Hearing on the Complaint.


                                    880
                                 APPENDIX T



06/17/21    Commission voted 4-0 to recommend Presbytery deny the
            Complaint.

07/06/21    The Commission adopted a written Decision to report to
            Presbytery, recommending the Complaint be denied.

07/31/21    At Presbytery’s Summer Stated Meeting, and without debate,
            Presbytery voted
            25-0 to approve the Commission’s judgment and denied the
            Complaint.

08/02/21    Mr. Miller took that Complaint to the Standing Judicial
            Commission, and it was styled as SJC Case 2021-09.

02/05/22    Panel Hearing via GoToMeeting. Panel included TE McGowan,
            RE Neikirk and RE Donahoe (chairman). Alternates TE Ross and
            RE Terrell were also present. Present for the parties were
            Complainant Miller and TE Aquila who acted as his assistant, and
            TE Reitano as the Respondent’s representative.

03/29/22    Panel adopted Proposed Decision and filed it with the SJC,
            copying the parties.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE

    Did Ohio Valley Presbytery err on 07/31/21 when it approved its
    Commission’s Judgment that the Session of Grace and Peace did not
    err on 01/11/21 when it denied Mr. Miller’s 12/13/20 Complaint?

III. JUDGMENT

      No. Therefore, the Complaint is denied.

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

This Case involved the Second Commandment and how Westminster Larger
Catechism 109 (“LC 109”) understands it, but more specifically, how those
teachings are applied to specific items. The application of those teachings is
a matter of discretion and judgment, i.e., the Session’s judgment about the
permissibility of the three clear windows, the nine stained-glass windows, and
the two banners. Thus, the standard of review in BCO 39-3.3 most closely
                                     881
                          MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



applies. The burden of proof was on the Complainant to demonstrate that the
windows and banners violate LC 109, and that burden was not met.

The Second Commandment and LC 109 are below.

            Exodus 20:4-6: 4 “You shall not make for yourself a carved
            image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or
            that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the
            earth. 5 You shall not bow down to them or serve them, for I
            the LORD your God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of
            the fathers on the children to the third and the fourth generation
            of those who hate me, 6 but showing steadfast love to
            thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments.
            (ESV)

            Q. 109. What are the sins forbidden in the second
            commandment?
            A. The sins forbidden in the second commandment are, all
            devising, counseling, commanding, using, and anywise
            approving, any religious worship not instituted by God
            himself; the making any representation of God, of all or of any
            of the three persons, either inwardly in our mind, or outwardly
            in any kind of image or likeness of any creature whatsoever;
            all worshiping of it, or God in it or by it; the making of any
            representation of feigned deities, and all worship of them, or
            service belonging to them; all superstitious devices, corrupting
            the worship of God, adding to it, or taking from it, whether
            invented and taken up of ourselves, or received by tradition
            from others, though under the title of antiquity, custom,
            devotion, good intent, or any other pretense whatsoever;
            parsimony; sacrilege; all neglect, contempt, hindering, and
            opposing the worship and ordinances which God hath
            appointed. 67

67
              For the italicized clause in LC 109 above, three Scriptures are cited - Deut.
     4, Acts 17, and Romans 1.
     (ESV. Emphases added below.)
     Deut. 4:15–19. 15 “Therefore watch yourselves very carefully. Since you saw no
     form on the day that the LORD spoke to you at Horeb out of the midst of the
     fire, 16 beware lest you act corruptly by making a carved image for yourselves, in the
     form of any figure, the likeness of male or female, 17 the likeness of any animal that
     is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flies in the air, 18 the likeness of
                                              882
                                     APPENDIX T



The Complainant contended each of the 14 items were violations of LC 109
and the Second Commandment. The Session judged they were not. In its two-
page November 2020 response to Mr. Miller (the month before his Complaint
filing), the Session presented arguments and concluded: “It is therefore the
position of the Session that the images in the windows are not images of the
Triune God and consequently do not need to be removed.” We do not find
clear error in the Session’s conclusion in that matter of discretion and judgment
and thus uphold the decisions of the two lower courts. We find the Session’s
application of LC 109 to fit within the general application of LC 109 in
Reformed churches in the last few centuries.

We also note the Respondent’s Brief reported the following:

       “Further, the Presbytery believes it is clear the Session of Grace
        and Peace takes the Second Commandment, along with the
        Catechisms’ explanation, very seriously. This is evidenced by
        the removal of an image they did believe would violate our
        system of doctrine (a kneeling image of Christ).”

The Complainant further alleged the windows and banners were used as “aids
in worship” at Grace and Peace Presbyterian Church. There is, however, no
evidence in the Record of any action by the Session regarding the use of, or

  anything that creeps on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water under
  the earth. 19 And beware lest you raise your eyes to heaven, and when you see the
  sun and the moon and the stars, all the host of heaven, you be drawn away and bow
  down to them and serve them, things that the LORD your God has allotted to all the
  peoples under the whole heaven.”
        Acts 17:29 [vss. 22-24 included for context: 22 So Paul, standing in the midst
  of the Areopagus, said: “Men of Athens, I perceive that in every way you are very
  religious. 23 For as I passed along and observed the objects of your worship, I found
  also an altar with this inscription: ‘To the unknown god.’ What therefore you
  worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you. 24 The God who made the world and
  everything in it, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by
  man ...] 29 Being then God's offspring, we ought not to think that the divine being
  is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by the art and imagination of man.
        Rom. 1:21-23, 25 21 For although they knew God, they did not honor him as
  God or give thanks to him, but they became futile in their thinking, and their foolish
  hearts were darkened. 22 Claiming to be wise, they became fools, 23 and exchanged
  the glory of the immortal God for images resembling mortal man and birds and
  animals and creeping things. ... 25 because they exchanged the truth about God for a
  lie and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed
  forever!
                                          883
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



reference to, the windows or banners in worship. Similarly, there is no
evidence in the Record that any reference was made to the windows or banners
during gathered corporate worship. In this regard, the evidence offered by the
Complainant simply consisted of his understanding of, and inferences from,
comments of some individual members of Session.

In the absence of clear evidence demonstrating that any of the 14 items
violated the Second Commandment and WLC 109, and in the absence of
evidence that any of these items were used in worship or were intended by
Session to be used in worship, we have no basis for finding that the Session
erred in its decision to allow the 14 items to remain in the Church building.
Therefore, the Complaint is denied.

The Panel decision was drafted by REs Donahoe and Neikirk and was adopted
by a Panel vote of 3-0.

The SJC revised and approved the decision on the following roll call vote:

    Bankson Absent          S. Duncan Concur         Nusbaum Concur
    Bise Concur             Ellis Concur             Pickering Concur
    Cannata Recused         Greco Concur             Ross Concur
    Carrell Concur          Kooistra Concur          Terrell Concur
    Coffin Concur           Lee Concur               Waters Concur
    Donahoe Concur          Lucas Concur             White Absent
    Dowling Concur          McGowan Concur           Wilson Concur
    M. Duncan Absent        Neikirk Concur
    (19-0-0)

TE Cannata recused himself because of his relationship with one of the
Presbytery’s representatives.




                                     884
                                APPENDIX T



                        CASE NO. 2021-10
                       F. TODD WILLIAMS
                                 v.
                    CHESAPEAKE PRESBYTERY
                      DECISION ON APPEAL
                           April 27, 2022

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

09/25/18   TE F. Todd Williams was indicted by the Chesapeake Presbytery
           Judicial Commission (CPJC) and charged with “failure to
           maintain his own family well… and to walk with exemplary piety
           before the flock… of God.” Three specifications were formulated
           in the indictment.

11/13/18   TE Williams confessed to some of the sins outlined in the
           indictment and requested that the matter be treated as a BCO 38-
           1 Case Without Process.

01/08/19   After several iterations related to the statement of the accused and
           the processes being followed, Chesapeake Presbytery met and
           received the CPJC report, which included the indictment, TE
           Williams’ written confession to the charges in the indictment, the
           pronouncement of judgment and censure, and admonition of the
           accused. Presbytery voted 42-3-3 to approve the judgment and
           censure.

03/05/19   TE Williams lodged a Complaint against the acts of CPJC and the
           decisions made by Presbytery on 01/08/19.
05/15/19   Chesapeake Presbytery voted to deny TE Williams’ Complaint.

06/11/19   TE Williams carried his Complaint to the Standing Judicial
           Commission of the PCA (SJC 2019-04).

08/24/20   The SJC sustained TE Williams’ Complaint, finding that
           Chesapeake Presbytery erred in approving the CPJC report
           because it conflated BCO 32 and 38-1, thus violating the due
           process rights of the accused. Further, the SJC ruled that the
           matter be returned to Chesapeake Presbytery for dismissal or
           proper adjudication.


                                     885
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



09/28/20   Presbytery instituted process by indicting TE Williams on charges
           of (1) failure to manage his household, (2) slandering his wife, and
           (3) inappropriate behavior with other women.

11/02/20   The CPJC held a plea hearing, at which TE Williams pled “not
           guilty” to charges #1 and #2, and “guilty” to the third charge. A
           trial date was set for 12/12/20.

11/05/20   The CPJC met and voted to dismiss charges #1 and #2, and to
           cancel the scheduled trial in favor of dealing with TE Williams
           according to the Court’s discretion in accordance with BCO 32-3.
           The court set 11/16/20 as the date of a meeting called in order to
           discuss its response to pre-arraignment motions filed by TE
           Williams and to establish TE Williams’ level of repentance prior
           to imposing a sentence.

11/16/20   The CPJC met and approved its response to TE Williams’
           requests. TE Williams did not appear. A follow up meeting was
           set for 12/07/20.

12/07/20   The CPJC met with TE Williams in order to determine his level
           of repentance. A motion passed to meet with the Session and staff
           of Safe Harbor Presbyterian Church (TE Williams’ former
           church) before imposing a censure; to that end a follow up meeting
           was set for 01/06/21.

01/06/21   The CPJC met with members of the Safe Harbor Session and
           Cindy Williams (TE Williams’ former wife). TE Williams was
           not present. At the conclusion of the meeting a motion to depose
           TE Williams and suspend him from the Sacraments was deferred.
           A follow up meeting to resume debate was set for 01/18/21.

01/07/21   The CPJC solicited the Stated Clerk for advice regarding
           reinstatement of the two charges the Court had previously
           dropped.

01/18/21   The CPJC met to discuss the motion deferred from its 01/06/21
           meeting, deciding to again defer the motion to its next meeting,
           which it set for 02/01/21.
02/01/21   The CPJC met as scheduled, with Cindy Williams and five other
           visitors present to be interviewed by the Court. After the
                                     886
                                 APPENDIX T



           interviews were conducted, the Court passed motions to rescind
           its dismissal of charges and to proceed with trial on 04/17/21.

02/02/21   TE Williams was informed that the decision to drop charges #1
           and #2 had been rescinded by the CPJC.

04/16/21   TE Williams communicated to the CPJC via email that he had just
           learned of the trial date. As a result, he failed to appear on
           04/17/21 and the Court set a new trial date of 05/15/21.

05/05/21   TE Williams wrote the CPJC requesting dismissal of the case.
           Barring that, he requested that another body hear the case, along
           with objecting to some of the witnesses scheduled to testify and
           requesting “discovery statements.” These requests were denied.
           A final request to provide recordings and transcripts after the trial
           was granted with respect to the recordings and denied with respect
           to a transcript (on the basis that it was not required unless and until
           TE Williams chose to appeal the decision of the Court at trial).

05/15/21   The trial was held, with the Court finding TE Williams guilty of
           all three charges against him and imposing the punishments of
           Deposition from office and Suspension from the Sacraments.

07/10/21   Chesapeake Presbytery voted in the affirmative (43-1-5) on the
           motion to accept the judgment of its CPJC.

07/30/21   TE Williams appealed the decision of Chesapeake Presbytery to
           the Standing Judicial Commission of the PCA, listing five
           specifications of error. (1) That there was an irregularity in the
           proceedings of the lower court, (2) that there was a refusal of
           reasonable indulgence, (3) that the Court received improper
           evidence and declined to receive proper evidence, (4) that there
           was prejudice manifested in the case, and (5) that there was an
           error in the Court’s judgment and censure.

03/09/22   A Panel consisting of RE Steve Dowling (Chair), RE John Bise
           (Secretary), TE Mike Ross, and Alternates TE Hoochan Paul Lee
           and RE John Pickering heard the case.




                                      887
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

    At its meeting on July 10th, 2021, did Chesapeake Presbytery err in
    approving the judgment and censure of its Presbytery Judicial
    Commission because of the following specifications of error?
        1. That there was an irregularity in the proceeding of the court
        2. That there was a refusal of reasonable indulgence
        3. That the Court received improper evidence and declined to receive
           proper evidence
        4. That there was prejudice manifested in the case, and
        5. That there was an error in the Court’s judgment and censure.

III. JUDGMENTS

    1.   No
    2.   No
    3.   No
    4.   No
    5.   No

    The decision of Chesapeake Presbytery is upheld in whole.

IV. REASONING AND OPINON

With respect to the guilty verdict Appellant raises five specifications of error
on the part of the Chesapeake Presbytery Judicial Commission.

In the 1st specification of error, Appellant alleges an irregularity in the
proceedings of the lower court based on the argument that he did not see his
citation to appear at trial until the day before the trial was scheduled to occur,
and that the Court declined his request to re-schedule in favor of citing him to
appear a second time.

BCO 32-4 governs the citation process, saying in part that “Indictments and
citations shall be delivered in person or in another manner providing
verification of the date of receipt. Compliance with these requirements shall
be deemed to have been fulfilled if a party cannot be located after diligent
inquiry or if a party refuses to accept delivery.” There are two elements
contained herein, the first designed to ensure that a citation was actually
delivered in accordance with Constitutional timelines, and the second a
modifier of the first designed to recognize the possibility of evasion. The
                                       888
                                 APPENDIX T



Appellant does not dispute that the citation was delivered on the date the
Appellee asserts it was, and instead has admitted that he overlooked it, which
is concomitant to receiving a letter and failing to open the envelope. That is
not the fault of the sender, but of the receiver. Even if this court of review
were to determine that Appellee’s failure to obtain a delivery receipt was an
irregularity, it would not be sufficient to overturn the decision because there
was no damage to the Appellant or his case by virtue of a second citation to
appear. There is no evidence that the CPJC used the Appellant’s initial failure
to appear to support an argument that he was not sufficiently repentant.
In the 2nd specification of error, Appellant asserts the refusal of reasonable
indulgence prior to, and at, the trial based on the argument that the CPJC
members hearing the case were the same men who conducted the previous case
that was appealed as SJC 2019-04.

There is no Constitutional prohibition against the same members of a court re-
hearing a case. If that were a Constitutional imperative, then a Presbytery not
operating its judiciary through a commission (and acting, instead, as a whole)
could never receive the instruction contained in the SJC’s decision in SJC
2019-04 and decide to re-try an accused person. Every member of Presbytery
who participated in the court, holding to this argument, would have to recuse
himself.

Moreover, BCO 32-16 establishes the right of an accused to challenge any
member sitting in the trial of the case by reason of cause. No individual
member of the CPJC was challenged and no cause given, and the argument
that BCO 32-17 applies because the members of the CPJC made their opinions
known in adjudicating the previous case is specious because, by advancement
of the argument made by the Appellant, all SJC judges should be, and some
must be, disqualified from sitting on the current case.

In the 3rd specification of error, Appellant alleges that the CPJC received
improper evidence while declining to receive proper evidence based on the
argument that his former wife (and those she influenced) provided the bulk of
evidence against him, and that in accordance with BCO 31.8 this evidence
should have been excluded.

Yet BCO 31.8 does not prohibit a court from receiving accusations from a
person who “…indulge(s) a malignant spirit towards the accused; who is not
of good character; who is himself under censure or process; who is deeply
interested in any respect in the conviction of the accused…” and so on.
Instead, it requires of a court receiving such accusations that it must exercise
                                      889
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



“great caution” in dealing with such persons. There is no evidence in the
Record of the Case that the CPJC failed to exercise such caution and, in this
connection, BCO 39-3.3 applies:

        A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great deference to a
        lower court regarding those matters of discretion and judgment
        which can only be addressed by a court with familiar
        acquaintance of the events and parties. Such matters of
        discretion and judgment would include, but not be limited to:
        the moral character of candidates for sacred office, the
        appropriate censure to impose after a disciplinary trial, or
        judgment about the comparative credibility of conflicting
        witnesses. Therefore, a higher court should not reverse such a
        judgment by a lower court, unless there is clear error on the
        part of the lower court (emphasis added).

In the 4th specification of error, Appellant alleges that the CPJC manifested
prejudice in the case on the basis of two exemplary arguments. The first
contends that CPJC exhibited prejudice by including elements of SJC 2019-04
in its full statement of the case to Presbytery, and the second that CPJC
demonstrated prejudice by suspending him from official functions and the
Sacraments; that is, that according to BCO 42-6 such suspensions must never
be done by way of censure, but since such suspensions are inherently punitive,
they necessarily demonstrate prejudice.

With respect to the first argument, BCO 15-3 does not provide specific
guidance on what it means to submit a “…full statement of the case and the
judgment rendered.” Such discretion is left to the court conducting a case, and
even while admitting the possibility that a court might go beyond the “full
statement” of a case, there is no proof that the statement in view here
prejudiced the Presbytery vote. Further, there is no way for a court of review
to properly assess this sub-specification in the absence in the ROC of the full
statement delivered to Presbytery.

With respect to the second argument, it does not so much demonstrate
prejudice in the case as a difference of opinion about the exercise of
constitutional authority. That Presbytery had sufficient reasons, and that it
documented its reasons through charges and by initiating process, is clear from
the record. The imputation of prejudice because Suspensions are inherently
punitive might be asserted, but it is not clearly deduced from nor demonstrated
in the record.
                                     890
                                  APPENDIX T




In the 5th specification of error, Appellant alleges an error and injustice in the
judgment and censure decided by the Court.

While there is no question that the censures leveled in this case are severe
(having only stopped short of actual excommunication), the BCO does not
prescribe specific punishments for particular offenses, nor does it rule out
applying any available censure to any conceivable offense. Instead, it
preserves the right of courts of the church to exercise their discretion:

        A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great deference to a
        lower court regarding those matters of discretion and judgment
        which can only be addressed by a court with familiar
        acquaintance of the events and parties. Such matters of
        discretion and judgment would include… the appropriate
        censure to impose after a disciplinary trial… Therefore, a
        higher court should not reverse such a judgment by a lower
        court, unless there is clear error on the part of the lower court.
        (BCO 39-3.3)

Because there is no clear error on the part of Presbytery, this Specification
cannot be sustained.

This decision was written by RE Steve Dowling and edited and adopted by the
Panel unanimously. The SJC amended and approved the decision on the
following roll call vote:

   Bankson Absent          M. Duncan Absent         Nusbaum Concur
   Bise Concur             S. Duncan Concur         Pickering Concur
   Cannata Concur          Ellis Concur             Ross Concur
   Carrell Concur          Greco Concur             Terrell Concur
   Coffin Concur           Kooistra Concur          Waters Concur
   Lee Concur              Lucas Concur             White Absent
   Donahoe Recused         McGowan Concur           Wilson Concur
   Dowling Concur          Neikirk Concur
      (19-0-0)
RE Donahoe recused himself because he was on a PCA Session 23 years ago
when the Appellant was one of two ministers on staff.




                                       891
              MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                  CASE NO. 2021-13
                    PHIL DUDT
                          v.
           NORTHWEST GEORGIA PRESBYTERY
                DECISION ON APPEAL
                    April 27, 2022

I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

07/16/18   The Midway Presbyterian Church (MPC) Session determined
           not to invite Dan Crouse to participate in officer training after
           being nominated for the office of Ruling Elder by RE Dudt.

08/20/18   A motion to rescind the July 19, 2018 action by the MPC
           Session not to invite Dan Crouse to the training class failed.

08/30/18   Dan and Angelia Crouse filed a Complaint that the MPC
           Session action on July 16, 2018 was a violation of the officer
           training and examination process outlined in the BCO.

01/21/19   The MPC Session denied the Complaint and appointed a
           Shepherding Committee of five REs and one TE to assist in
           shepherding Dan and Angelia Crouse.

02/18/19   Four REs, including RE Dudt, filed a dissent with the MPC
           Session regarding the denial of the Complaint.

04/02/19   The Northwest Georgia Presbytery (NWGP) adopted the
           recommendation of its Judicial Commission that the
           Complaint be denied.

04/04/19   Dan Crouse carried his Complaint to the General Assembly.

10/18/19   The Standing Judicial Commission (SJC 2019-03) ruled that
           the MPC Session erred in setting aside the nomination of
           Crouse to be a ruling elder prior to training and examination.

05/11/20   RE Dudt made a speech at a MPC Session meeting imploring
           the Session to call a congregational meeting to inform them
           of the SJC 2019-03 decision, publicly repent, and apologize
           to Dan and Angelia Crouse. No motion was made related to
           the speech.

                                 892
                            APPENDIX T



06/15/20   RE Dudt made a motion at a MPC Session meeting “That the
           Midway Session inform the Midway Congregation of case
           2019-3, the SJC’s decision, and the Session’s formal
           response. That this be done before the nomination process
           starts on the 2020 elections.” The motion failed when a
           substitute motion passed.

07/08/20   The MPC Session called a Congregational Meeting for July
           19, 2020 to elect three assistant pastors as associate pastors.

07/12/20   Seven days prior to the congregational meeting, RE Dudt
           emailed the congregation the following (emphasis original):

                   RE: The congregational meeting of July 19,
                   2020

                   I am writing to you as an Elder of Midway
                   Presbyterian Church with regards to the
                   congregational meeting set for Sunday 7-19-
                   2020, however I am not representing the
                   Midway Session.

                   Whereas: This recommendation was hastily
                   established. A Session meeting was called on
                   July 4, 2020 and the Session met on July 8,
                   2020 to discuss and decide this matter.

                   Whereas: The entire Session was not able to
                   be present for the meeting.

                   Whereas: This was not a unanimous decision
                   by the Midway Session and a significant
                   minority is opposed to this motion.

                   Whereas: The current pandemic will prohibit
                   full participation by the congregation in said
                   meeting.

                   Whereas: According to the Book of Church
                   Order of the PCA (chapter 20-2) “A church
                   shall proceed to elect a pastor in the following
                                893
              MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                   manner: The Session shall call a
                   congregational meeting to elect a pulpit
                   committee which may be composed of
                   members from the congregation at large or the
                   Session, as designated by the congregation.”

                   Whereas: The Standing Judicial Committee of
                   the PCA ruled against the Midway Session
                   and the Northwest Georgia Presbytery in the
                   case of Dan and Angelia Crouse vs. the
                   Northwest Georgia Presbytery (SJC Case
                   2019-03) for unconstitutionally handling
                   officer nominations. See pages 44-47 of the
                   following     link:    https://pcaga.org/wp-
                   content/uploads/2020/06/SJC-Report-to-GA-
                   2020-6-9-20.pdf

                   Whereas: The proposed action will expand the
                   Session to 16 members and unduly enhance
                   the influence of the church staff in the
                   governance of the church. This will give the
                   staff a voting block that will require a
                   supermajority of ruling elders to prevail on
                   any motion including the budget and other
                   financial issues.

                   Therefore: I am asking the congregation to
                   support a substitute motion to postpone this
                   meeting until January 2021 to allow the
                   congregation reasonable time to prayerfully
                   consider the church’s needs, the men’s
                   qualifications, the establishment of a pulpit
                   committee, and the subsidence of the global
                   pandemic to allow for greater congregational
                   participation.

09/21/20   The MPC Session approved a resolution defining how a
           member of the Session can dissent from an action of the
           Session which included, among other requirements, that an
           elder must first resign from his office if he feels compelled to
           publicly communicate “dissatisfaction with or any opposition
                                894
                              APPENDIX T



             to a decision or action of the Session.” Otherwise, the elder
             would be in violation of vow #5 and/or vow #6.

10/07/20     The MPC Session approved moving forward with process
             against RE Dudt and issued an indictment with two charges.
             Those charges are shown below:
             (1) Violating of his ordination vows (#5, 6) distributing the
             SJC case 2019-03 [Crouse v. NW GA] to the entire
             congregation against the express will of the Session and
             therefore failing to be in subjection to his brethren (vow #5),
             and
             (2) Violating the ninth commandment and vow #6 in the
             letter he sent [to the congregation] on July 12, 2020.

10/19/20     RE Dudt pled “not guilty” to the two charges outlined in the
             indictment.

10/22/20     Three MPC Session ruling elders requested the Moderator call
             a meeting for the purpose of considering two motions: (i)
             approval an independent moderator from the NWGP for the
             process and trial and (ii) engagement of a court reporter for
             the trial.

10/26/20     The MPC Session met to consider the two motions. Both
             motions failed.

11/11/2020   The trial commenced at 7:30 pm and concluded at 5:40 am the
             next day. RE Dudt was found guilty of the two charges in the
             indictment and censured by indefinite suspension from office.
             The MPC Session appointed both a Restoration Committee
             and a Respondents Committee (in case of an appeal). The
             Session also approved a summary statement of its actions
             against RE Dudt to be sent to the congregation on November
             12, 2020.

11/12/20     RE Dudt submitted a Notice of Intention to Appeal dated
             11/11/2020 with the NWGP Clerk.

11/12/20     MPC Session sent an email to the congregation communicating
             that RE Dudt had been censured.


                                  895
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



11/16/20        MPC Session approved a revised statement regarding RE
                Dudt to send to the congregation.

12/07/20        RE Dudt submitted an Appeal with the NWGP Clerk.

04/27/20        NWGP Judicial Commission conducted the Appeal Hearing.

08/21/20        NWGP approved the Judicial Commission Decision that the
                MPC Session did not err procedurally or manifest prejudice in
                its prosecution of RE Dudt.

02/11/20        The SJC Panel Hearing was conducted via GoToMeeting. The
                Panel included TE Coffin, RE Terrell, and TE Waters
                (chairman). Alternates RE Dowling and TE Kooistra were
                present. Also present were RE Dudt and RE David who acted
                as his assistant, and TE Daniel who served as the Respondent’s
                representative.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE

    At its meeting on November 12, 2020, did the Session of Midway
    Presbyterian Church err in finding RE Dudt guilty at trial of the two
    charges in the indictment and thereafter imposing upon RE Dudt the
    censure of indefinite suspension from office; and at its meeting on August
    21, 2021, did Northwest Georgia Presbytery err in approving its Judicial
    Commission’s decision that the Midway Presbyterian Church Session did
    not err in its prosecution and censure of RE Dudt?

III. JUDGMENT

    Yes. The decisions of the Session of Midway Presbyterian Church and
    Northwest Georgia Presbytery are reversed in whole. The SJC renders the
    decision that should have been rendered, to wit, not guilty. RE Dudt is
    relieved of his conviction and censure and is restored to the full exercise
    of his office.

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

With respect to the guilty verdict, Appellant raises 40 specifications of error
on the part of MPC Session and 15 specifications of error on the part of
NWGP. Of the specifications of Session error, 14 were sustained (3, 4, 5, 6, 9
                                     896
                                   APPENDIX T



in part, 14, 15, 23, 24, 25, 30, 31, 33, 34). Of the specifications of Presbytery
error, eight were sustained (1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 13, 14, 15). The specifications of error
sustained, taken together, demonstrate clear error on the part of the lower
courts with respect to factual findings and matters of discretion and judgment,
as well as violations of the Constitution of the PCA, all of which vindicate the
Judgment of the SJC in this case. The Session and Presbytery alleged errors
will be taken up in turn below.

In the 1st specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
not pursuing a BCO 31-2 investigation into his actions, establishing a strong
presumption of guilt, and on that basis instituting process.
         This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. BCO 32-2 provides that “Process against an
        offender shall not be commenced unless some person or persons
        undertake to make out the charge; or unless the court finds it
        necessary, for the honor of religion, itself to take the step provided for
        in BCO 31-2.” The Session followed the path of the former disjunct.

In the 2nd specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session
misrepresented him in the indictment when it charged that RE Dudt had
“distributed” the SJC case 2019-03 to the entire congregation.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Providing a link in an email is a commonplace
        means of document distribution.

In the 3rd specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
in failing to demonstrate that the distribution of SJC case 2019-03 to the entire
congregation, against the will of the Session, is properly an offense according
to BCO 29-1.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Regardless of the means employed to express
        its will, Session has no right to make that will a rule requiring
        obedience from a Session member that is not based upon Scripture.
        Preliminary Principle 7 declares: “All church power, whether
        exercised by the body in general, or by representation, is only
        ministerial and declarative since the Holy Scriptures are the only rule
                                        897
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        of faith and practice. No church judicatory may make laws to bind the
        conscience”. The Session had a right to refuse to distribute the SJC
        decision in question. The Session had no right to forbid RE Dudt from
        doing so, the 5th ordination vow notwithstanding. The promise to be
        in “subjection to your brethren” is always qualified and limited by “in
        the Lord.” As the Larger Catechism instructs us, we owe authorities
        over us “obedience to their lawful commands and counsels. . . .
        (emphasis added, LC 127).” (BCO 14-7)

In the 4th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
finding RE Dudt guilty of the first charge of the indictment, to wit, distributing
SJC case 2019-03 to the entire congregation against the express will of the
Session, when at trial no evidence of such an express will was forthcoming.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. “Express” is defined as “Directly and
        distinctly stated or expressed rather than implied or left to inference:
        not dubious or ambiguous: definite, clear, explicit, unmistakable.”
        (Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1976)). The ROC did
        not provide any evidence of such an express will. An action by the
        Session to decline itself to distribute a document does not imply that a
        Session member is prohibited from such a distribution. In fact, the
        ROC shows that during the trial, defense’s questioning witnesses on
        this point was repeated so frequently, with no evidence forthcoming,
        that the Moderator sought to preempt further pursuit of the matter with
        witnesses to come: “May we try something on that line of questioning?
        May we by common consent agree that on that series of questions,
        there was no explicit mandate to Elder Dudt? Is there any objection?
        So we will stipulate that there was no explicit mandate to Elder Dudt
        not to distribute. . . .” Apparently, before he could rule, there was
        objection voiced; however, the Moderator’s proposal is a clear
        indication of the state of the evidence-gathering, at least at that late
        point in the proceedings. Further, the Presbytery Judicial
        Commission’s written decision plainly grants the point: “In this case,
        the will of Midway's session, regarding how SJC 2019-03 was to be
        handled by the leadership of the church, was consistent and
        recognizable, even if it was not explicit. . . .” The charge in the
        indictment, however, was that the action was “against the express will
        of the Session.” [emphasis added. Session clearly erred in finding RE
        Dudt guilty of the first charge of the indictment.
                                       898
                                  APPENDIX T



In the 5th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
finding RE Dudt guilty of the second charge of the indictment, to wit, violating
the ninth commandment by including false statements in the July 12 email sent
from RE Dudt to the congregation.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC does not show evidence for the
        allegation that there were false statements in the Appellant’s July 12
        email. Absent such evidence, the Session’s finding is clearly in error.

In the 6th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
finding
RE Dudt guilty of the second charge of the indictment, to wit, violating the
ninth commandment, by the July 12th email as a whole. Appellant alleges that
Session, without evidence, found that “The purpose of the Letter (specifically,
his use of the SJC decision) was to challenge the competency, credibility, and
trustworthiness of the Session. Mr. Dudt did not accurately represent the
Session’s process or position. He employed partial truth to bias the
congregation against its elders in order to defeat their recommendation at the
forthcoming . . . congregational meeting.”

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Appellant’s purpose in the letter is clearly
        stated: “I am asking the congregation to support a substitute motion to
        postpone this meeting until January 2021 to allow the congregation
        reasonable time to prayerfully consider the church's needs, the men's
        qualifications, the establishment of a pulpit committee, and the
        subsidence of the global pandemic to allow for a greater
        congregational participation.” This purpose is misstated in the
        Session’s indictment: “ in order to defeat their recommendation at the
        forthcoming . . . congregational meeting.” The Session clearly erred
        in the judgment made about the content of the email. The ROC does
        not sustain the claim that Session showed that RE Dudt’s email to the
        congregation constituted an offense as defined by BCO 29-1.

In the 7th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
finding RE Dudt guilty of the second charge of the indictment, to wit, violating
ordination vow 6 when evidence to the contrary, from SJC 2015-11, was
prohibited from being introduced at the trial.
                                       899
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        This specification of error is not sustained.
        A Minute Explanatory. There is no citation in the ROC that sustains
        this allegation. However, it is of interest to note that the case referred
        to in the specification shows that the SJC ruled that: “The admonitions
        given [the accused] as represented in the Indictment could be
        interpreted as instructing [the accused] not to send any emails
        regarding church business, not even one composed with temperate
        language, and with accurate, non-confidential content, and sent to
        willing recipients. . . . A ban of that scope would be beyond the powers
        of a Session because that prohibition would have no basis in the
        general moral regulations of Scripture.” (SJC 2015-11, Thompson v.
        S. Florida, M44GA, p. 539)

In the 8th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by not investigating the alleged offenses prior to indicting RE Dudt, thus
violating BCO 31-2.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 1st specification of Session
        error.

In the 9th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by not investigating the alleged offenses prior to indicting RE Dudt, thus
violating BCO 31-2. Further, the specification alleges that the Session erred
passing a resolution prohibiting all active officers from publicly disagreeing
with the Session. Appellant alleges that this resolution provided a foundation,
ex post facto, for the accusations against RE Dudt with respect to his July 12th
email.

        This specification of error is not sustained, in part, and sustained, in
        part.

        A Minute Explanatory. As to the first part, concerning BCO 31-2, see
        specification of error 1. As to the second part, it is sustained. The so-
        called “Talley Resolution” clearly violates BCO PP II.7 and WCF 20-
        2. Such in thesi deliverances form no part of the Constitution of the
        Church and have no binding power. Yet the question of their authority
        and of their binding power typically at once become a subject of
        controversy and needlessly divide the Church. A Session cannot
        authoritatively establish the meaning of the BCO, it can only interpret
                                       900
                                   APPENDIX T



        it in light of its history and its sense as received by the Church. No
        officer can be subject to discipline for disagreeing with, or violating,
        such a resolution. Further, the Resolution is effectively a bill of
        attainder, i.e., an act of a legislature declaring a person, or a group of
        people, guilty of some crime, and punishing them, without a trial, and
        as such it is invalid. It is instructive to note that a bill of attainder is
        prohibited in the United States Constitution and that every state
        constitution also expressly forbids bills of attainder. The BCO clearly
        forbids such a procedure in, for example, 24-7 and Preliminary
        Principle 8.

In the 10th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by classifying the alleged offenses as “general” when no heresy or immorality
was involved.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Appellant appears to understand the difference
        between “personal offenses” and “general offenses” (BCO 29-3) to be
        the kind of criminality involved. In fact the difference is concerning
        the offended: Personal, when one or more particular individuals are
        the subject; general, when that is not the case.

In the 11th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by classifying the alleged offenses as “public,” while he alleges that they were
only known to a few.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Whatever the degrees of understanding of
        relative criminality might have been, the email to the congregation
        makes it categorically “public.”

In the 12th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by not sending a committee to converse with RE Dudt before instituting
process.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The provisions of BCO 31-7 make the use of
        such a committee entirely at the Session’s discretion and the Appellant
                                       901
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        has provided no evidence that such a committee would have
        “promote[d] the interests of religion” in this case.

In the 13th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
in not following the principles of Matthew 18.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC shows that the two elders, Keesee
        and Talley, who initiated the charges, first spoke with RE Dudt privately.

In the 14th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
in assigning malicious motive to RE Dudt in the production and distribution
of his July 12th email, contrary to his expressed intent.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 6th specification of Session
        error.

In the 15th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
in failing to follow the procedures of BCO 32-3.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The minutes of the Special Session Meeting of
        October 7, 2020, and the dating of the indictment clearly show that the
        Session conflated the provisions of BCO 32-3. However, Appellant
        did not raise a point of order, as was his right, at that meeting, nor at
        the Stated Session Meeting of October 19, 2020 when he was called
        upon to plead with respect to the indictment; and the error did not
        cause material harm to Appellant’s cause.

In the 16th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
in that the indictment did not match the charges made received at the October
7, 2020, Special Session Meeting.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. There is no provision in the Rules of Discipline
        that requires an indictment to include all of the wording included in a
                                       902
                                  APPENDIX T



        charge received. Further, if there was an error, it is the error of the
        Prosecutor, not the Session. In any case, the error did not cause
        material harm to Appellant’s cause.

In the 17th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges Session erred by
instituting process as if the prosecution was instituted by the court when it was
initiated by two elders when they called for the October 7, 2020 Session
meeting to indict the RE Dudt.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC shows the MPC Session voted to
        commence process against RE Dudt at a duly constituted meeting of
        the court on October 7, 2020. (187)

In the 18th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges Session erred by
allowing an elder to prosecute the case without first attempting to reconcile
and reclaim the offender in violation of BCO 31-5.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 13th specification of
        Session error.

In the 19th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
when several members of the court failed to study the Rules of Discipline in
preparation for the trial.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. It is wise for the members of a church court to
        study the Rules of Discipline, but the ROC does not establish that the
        Rules were not understood by the court. Additionally, the ROC
        indicates the moderator summarized the Rules in the Session meeting
        on October 7, 2020.

In the 20th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by not demanding that the members of the pastoral staff attempt the means of
reconciliation.

        This specification of error is not sustained.
                                      903
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        A Minute Explanatory. There is no constitutional requirement that the
        Session direct the pastoral staff to pursue reconciliation. Also see
        Minute for the 13th specification of Session error.

In the 21st specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
because three associate pastors did not recuse themselves since the alleged
offenses were directly related to the calling of them to associate pastor and two
of them argued in favor of the indictment and conviction of RE Dudt.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC does not indicate the Appellant
        challenged the right of any member of the court to sit in the trial. (BCO
        32-16)

In the 22nd specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by denying RE Dudt’s request for an independent moderator.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. While it would have been wise to have
        procured an independent moderator in this case, it was not
        constitutionally required.

In the 23rd specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by allowing RE Dudt only one communing member of the congregation to
represent him at trial before the Session when BCO 32-19 states "an accused
person, if he desires it, may be represented before the Session by any
communing member of the same particular church.”

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The substance of BCO 32-19 is that
        professional counsel is not permitted, not that the accused is limited to
        only one representative.

In the 24th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by receiving accusations from witnesses deeply interested in the conviction of
the accused (BCO 31-8).

        This specification of error is sustained.
                                      904
                                  APPENDIX T



        A Minute Explanatory. The Record indicates there are at least two
        instances of evidence of accusations being received from individuals
        who were “deeply interested in any respect to the conviction of the
        accused.” BCO 31-8 does not prohibit accusations from witnesses
        that are deeply interested in a conviction, but the provision does
        require the exercise of great caution. There is no evidence in the ROC
        that any caution, great or otherwise, was exercised by the court with
        respect to these witnesses. (BCO 31-8).

In the 25th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
during the trial by allowing the moderator to relinquish and reassume the chair,
which allowed him to examine witnesses.

        This specification of error is sustained.
        A Minute Explanatory. Robert’s Rules of Order states: “The presiding
        officer who relinquished the chair then may not return to it until the
        pending main question has been disposed of, since he has shown
        himself to be a partisan as far as that particular matter is concerned.
        Indeed, unless a presiding officer is extremely sparing in leaving the
        chair to take part in debate, he may destroy members’ confidence in
        the impartiality of his approach to the task of presiding.” RONR
        (12th ed.) 43:29

In the 26th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
when several elders testified that they had been angry with RE Dudt and
therefore should have recused themselves to avoid violating BCO 27-4 and
BCO 31-8.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC does not indicate the members of the
        court exercised their power out of “wrath” (BCO 27-4).

In the 27th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by not allowing members of the congregation to attend the trial when they
voted to conduct the proceedings in executive session.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. It was constitutionally permissible for the
        Session to conduct the trial in executive session.
                                      905
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



In the 28th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred
by conducting the trial in executive session in conflict with the requirement of
minute keeping of the procedures stated in BCO 32-18.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC indicates that careful records of the
        procedures, including the trial with transcript, were completed as
        directed in BCO 32-18.

A 29th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred by
not allowing RE Dudt’s wife to attend the trial.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 27th specification of
        Session error.

A 30th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred by
declining to receive proper evidence (BCO 42-3) that could have contradicted
the indictment's claims that RE Dudt’s actions that "led to a divisive
congregational meeting" when lines of questioning to witnesses about the
congregational meeting were ruled out of order by the moderator on grounds
of relevancy.
        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The Moderator improperly ruled out of order
        questions that may have led to testimony that contradicted the
        indictment’s charge of divisiveness. When an objection was raised
        against the Moderator’s ruling, Session upheld the Moderator’s ruling.

A 31st specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred when
the moderator, when questioned during the trial, did not definitely state that
the burden of proof rests with the prosecution.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The burden of proof is placed on the
        prosecution.
        SJC 1998-08 states:


                                      906
                                  APPENDIX T



            "The fact that the burden of proof is on the prosecution is
            clear from several procedures in our Book of Church Order.
            First, the reason why the prosecution argues first at trial, and
            has the closing remarks, is because the burden of proof is on
            the prosecution. Second, the accused is not required to testify
            and the defense need not even present a case. The
            prosecution, however, must present a case. Third, if an
            accused person ignores repeated citations to plead, or to
            appear for trial, that person can be censured for contumacy.
            He is not, however, censured for the offense on which he was
            indicted because his guilt on that charge has not yet been
            proven.” (Beverly Smith v. Southwest, M28GA, pp. 218,
            227)

A 32nd specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session’s
moderator and clerk refused to distribute copies of the trial audio recordings
to the accused within four weeks of Appellant’s conviction and, therefore,
Session erred in violation of BCO 32-18.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC does not furnish evidence of such a
        request having been refused by Session, whether through Session’s
        moderator or through Session’s clerk. However, if the ROC had
        demonstrated this, it would have been a Session error.

A 33rd specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
violation of BCO 42-6 when it announced to the congregation the Appellant’s
censure approximately an hour and a half after Appellant had filed notice of
appeal with the Clerk of Session.

A 34th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that the wording of
Session’s November 12 letter to the congregation, announcing Session’s
judgment and Appellant’s censure, violated BCO 42-6.

        These two specifications of error are sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. BCO 42-6 reads in part, “Notice of appeal shall
        have the effect of suspending the judgment of the lower court until the
        case has been finally decided in the higher court.” Appellant filed
        notice of appeal, dated November 11, 2020, to Clerk of Presbytery .
                                      907
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        That notice had the effect of suspending Session’s judgment in the trial
        of Appellant. Session therefore erred when it communicated to the
        congregation on November 12 that Appellant had been censured.

A 35th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
violation of BCO 42-6 when it prevented Appellant from exercising his official
functions without documenting sufficient reasons.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Invoking BCO 42-6 and 31-10, Session acted
        to suspend Appellant from the functions of office, without censure, and
        offered grounds for its action.

A 36th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
violation of BCO 42-6 in prohibiting RE Dudt from “performing non-office
related duties.”

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC indicates that a member of Session’s
        Restoration Committee communicated to Appellant that his
        suspension from office did include activities that the specification
        characterizes as “non-office related duties.” But the ROC does not
        indicate that Session acted to prohibit Appellant from performing
        particular duties not related to his office.

A 37th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
the “harshness of its censure to suspend RE Dudt from the functions of office
for his alleged offense,” and should have, rather, imposed the censure of
admonition.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The censure of admonition is to be administered
        to “an accused, who, upon conviction, satisfies the court as to his
        repentance and makes such restitution as is appropriate. Such censure
        concludes the judicial process” (BCO 30-1). In the judgment of the
        Session at the time of the imposition of censure, Appellant had not met
        the requisite conditions for the censure of admonition and, therefore, the
        Session was in no position to inflict this censure upon Appellant. This
                                      908
                                  APPENDIX T



        Minute should not be construed as an endorsement of Session’s
        judgment at the time of the imposition of censure.

A 38th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
violation of BCO 42-6 when the Session’s Restoration Committee sent an
email to Appellant on November 16, 2020 “to begin the process of restoration
even though all committee members knew that the notice of appeal, which
suspended the judgment, had been filed, thus not respecting RE Dudt’s right
of appeal (BCO 42-6).”

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The email in question was written by a
        member of the committee “on behalf of the restoration committee.”
        As such, any alleged error would be of the committee and not of the
        Session. The ROC does not demonstrate that the contents of the email
        communicated actions of the Session.

A 39th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred when
it allowed a TE “who testified during the trial that he did not privately discuss
this matter with RE Dudt due to a perceived conflict of interest” to write, on
behalf of the Restoration Committee, to Appellant the email of November 16,
2020.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

         A Minute Explanatory. The ROC does not indicate that Session
         appointed or expressly permitted this TE to write the email of
         November 16, 2020.
A 40th specification of Session error, Appellant alleges that Session erred in
violation of BCO 42-6 when an email sent by a member of the Session’s
Restoration Committee communicated to Appellant that his suspension would
“persist even in the presence of an appeal [citing BCO 36-5]” notwithstanding
the judgment of the lower court having been suspended by Appellant’s filing
notice of appeal.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The ROC shows that the language in question
        is that of a member of a committee of Session but does not show that
        this language is that of the Session.
                                      909
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



A 1st specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery erred
in violation of BCO 42-5 when it allowed testimony taken after the trial to be
included in the ROC.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. The Session does not dispute that such
        testimony was so added, but argues that this inclusion is permissible
        under BCO 42-5 (“any papers bearing on the case”). But testimony
        taken after the trial is not a “paper bearing on the case” (BCO 42-5; cf.
        BCO 35-13,14) and, as such, should not have been added to the ROC.

A 2nd specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery erred
in violation of BCO 42-3 (“refusal of reasonable indulgence to a party on
trial”) when it declined Appellant’s request to reformat the ROC.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. BCO 42-3 governs the lower court’s actions in
        the course of a trial. As such, it does not regulate a higher court’s
        responsibilities with respect to reformatting the existing transcript of
        a trial conducted by a lower court.

A 3rd specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery erred
in violation of BCO 42-4 when it concluded that Appellant had not submitted
notice of appeal on November 12, 2020 because Appellant’s filing lacked
supporting reasons, and that Appellant only properly submitted (that is, with
supporting reasons) his appeal on December 7, 2020.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. BCO 42-4 envisions two distinct actions that
        Presbytery has conflated in its adjudication of this matter. First,
        “notice of appeal may be given the court before its adjournment.”
        Second, Appellant has thirty days to submit “written notice of appeal,
        with supporting reasons” to the clerks of the lower and higher courts.

A 4th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery erred
in its ruling that Session did not violate BCO 42-6 when Session announced to
the congregation the Appellant’s conviction and censure on November 12.


                                      910
                                  APPENDIX T



        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 33rd and 34th specifications
        of Session error.

A 5th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery erred
in violation of BCO 42-8 when it failed to answer each specification of error
alleged in Appellant’s appeal.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Presbytery declined to address the Appellant’s
        specifications “in an ad seriatim fashion” and adopted “a summative
        approach,” “rul[ing] against all 40 grounds, with only some given a
        response”. But BCO 42-8 requires the higher court “to vote on each
        specification in this form: Shall this specification of error be
        sustained?”

A 6th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges Presbytery erred by
concluding that the claim that the MPC Session was prejudiced was “never
substantiated.”

        This specification of error is not sustained.

A 7th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery erred
by not overturning RE Dudt’s conviction on the first specification of the
indictment. Appellant alleges that he was indicted and convicted for lack of
submission to the “express” will of the Session. He further alleges that
Presbytery found only that RE Dudt had violated what they took to be the
implied will of the Session, and, without warrant, found that supposed
implication sufficient to convict.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Presbytery’s substituting of implied will for
        express will is clearly in error. See Minute for the 4th specification of
        Session error.

An 8th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery
erred by not sustaining the Appellant’s claims that he was denied reasonable
indulgences (BCO 42-3) that included an independent moderator, a court
                                      911
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



reporter, the trial not be held in executive session and permitting his wife to
attend the trial.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 22nd, 27th, 28th, and 29th
        specifications of Session error.
A 9th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery erred
in violation of BCO 32-18 when it declared in its Written Decision that
Appellant had mischaracterized as “hasty” a decision of Session that “in fact
… had been discussed and deliberated upon for several months prior to the
called congregational meeting”. Appellant alleges that this declaration (“in fact
… meeting”) “is not one of the Facts of the Case.”

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. BCO 32-18 prevents the higher court from
        taking into consideration anything “not contained” in the ROC. But
        Appellant’s allegation reflects a difference between Appellant and
        Appellee with respect to the interpretation of the contents of the ROC.

A 10th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery “due
to its conflict of interest regarding the inclusion of the SJC decision” acted
prejudicially against the Appellant when it devoted “nearly one-third” of its
Written Decision to Appellant’s distribution of an SJC Case to the
congregation.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Appellant has not demonstrated either that
        Presbytery had a conflict of interest in this matter or that such alleged
        conflict of interest accounts for the proportion of the treatment of this
        matter relative to the length of Presbytery’s Written Decision as a
        whole.

An 11th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery
erred in concurring with the Session in classifying the alleged offenses as
“public,” while he alleges that they were only known to a few.

        This specification of error is not sustained.


                                      912
                                  APPENDIX T



        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 11th specification of
        Session error.

A 12th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery
erred when it accepted the Session’s claim that RE Dudt’s email divided the
congregation.

        This specification of error is not sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. Presbytery, not having found clear error on the
        part of the Session with respect to this factual claim, exhibited
        appropriate deference to the lower court’s finding.

A 13th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery
erred by not recognizing that the MPC Session failed to exercise great caution
by receiving accusations from witnesses “deeply interested in any respect in the
conviction of the accused” (BCO 31-8).
        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 24th specification of
        Session error.

A 14th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery
erred by ruling that charge 1 of the Session’s indictment, citing Acts 15:24-25;
Titus 1:6-7, 10, gave adequate Scriptural support for the charge that RE Dudt’s
email constituted an offense as defined by BCO 29-1.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 3rd specification of Session
        error.

A 15th specification of Presbytery error, Appellant alleges that Presbytery
erred by condoning the indictment’s assigned motive to RE Dudt’s July 12,
2020, email to the congregation.

        This specification of error is sustained.

        A Minute Explanatory. See Minute for the 6th specification of Session
        error.


                                      913
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The Panel decision was written by TE David Coffin, RE Bruce Terrell, TE
Guy Waters, RE Steve Dowling, and TE Paul Kooistra, and edited and
approved by the Panel 3-0-0.”

The SJC modified and approved the decision on the following roll call vote:

    Bankson Absent           S. Duncan Concur         Nusbaum Concur
    Bise Concur              Ellis Concur             Pickering Not Qual.
    Cannata Concur           Greco Concur             Ross Concur
    Carrell Concur           Kooistra Concur          Terrell Concur
    Coffin Concur            Lee Concur               Waters Concur
    Donahoe Concur           Lucas Concur             White Absent
    Dowling Concur           McGowan Concur           Wilson Concur
    M. Duncan Absent         Neikirk Concur
    (19-0-0)

                           Concurring Opinion
  of RE Howie Donahoe, joined by TE Sean Lucas, TE Charles McGowan,
     TE Mike Ross, RE Dan Carrell, RE EJ Nusbaum, RE Bruce Terrell

We concurred with the Decision but believe two comments are warranted -
one as a critique of a Session trial court procedure and the other as a general
caution regarding individual elders emailing their congregations.

1. The Summary of the Facts indicates that on November 11, 2020, “The trial
commenced at 7:30 pm and concluded at 5:40 am the next day.” The Record
indicates the meeting concluded at 5:40 am, but it’s unclear when the defense
and prosecution closing arguments occurred. Presumably, because there were
three prosecution witnesses and 16 defense witnesses, it was probably well
after midnight. That is a highly unreasonable way to conduct a trial. An
overnight trial is extraordinary, and so is a court discussing the verdict and
censure during the wee hours of the morning. The Record does not indicate
time was of the essence in this matter. The trial court committed a clear error
of judgment in this procedure, despite the defendant’s failure to object.

However, because the Appellant didn’t cite this matter as a specification of
error, the SJC did not address it, following BCO 39-3.1: “A higher court,
reviewing a lower court, should limit itself to the issues raised by the parties
to the case in the original (lower) court.” While we agree the SJC should avoid
basing judgments on issues unraised by the parties, it is proper to raise
concerns about a lower court error, nonetheless. Doing so helps to clarify that
                                      914
                                 APPENDIX T



serious errors evident in the Summary of the Facts, and thus evident to the
reader, are not necessarily judged as benign.

2. It would be unfortunate for anyone to conclude, that because this Appeal
was sustained, it is appropriate for a Session member to email his congregation
expressing disagreement with a Session decision. Such conduct would rarely
be wise or appropriate.

It would be unfortunate if any elder feels emboldened by this ruling. Session
members have several avenues for expressing disagreement with a Session
decision, some wiser than others, depending on the circumstances. And
ordination vows 5 and 6 certainly must have some bearing on the matter - #5.
“Do you promise subjection to your brethren in the Lord?” #6. “Do you
promise to strive for the purity, peace, unity, and edification of the Church?”

In addressing Appellant specification of error #3, the SJC ruled: “The Session
had a right to refuse to distribute the SJC decision in question. The Session
had no right to forbid RE Dudt from doing so, the 5th ordination vow
notwithstanding.” We agree. The SJC Decision in Case 2019-03 Crouse v.
Northwest Georgia was a General Assembly action and one which the
congregation had a right to see, regardless of whether the SJC Decision found
error in a Session action. (BCO 14-7)

But the Session’s decision declining to distribute the Decision was not the lone
concern expressed by the Appellant in his July 2020 email to the congregation.
He offered other critiques of the Session, including his disagreement with the
Session’s decision to recommend the congregation promote three assistant
pastors to associates and his disagreement with the Session’s interpretation of
BCO 20-2.

The Decision ruled that the Appellant’s distribution of the Crouse Decision
was not a censurable offense. (Charge 1; Appellant specification of error #3,
sustained by the SJC) The Decision also ruled that the Session did not prove
the email contained false statements or that the email “as a whole” violated the
9th commandment. (Charge 2; Appellant specifications of error #5 and #6,
sustained by the SJC) Nevertheless, the propriety and wisdom of sending such
an email to the congregation is, in our opinion, highly questionable.

There are few things that disturb the peace and unity of a church more than
individual elders bringing to public attention their disagreements with Session
decisions. And few things disturb the peace and unity of a church more than
                                      915
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



a Session putting an elder on trial for actions related to disagreements with the
Session. Not many things divide a church more quickly.


                        CASE NO. 2021-06
                     DANIEL HERRON, ET AL.
                                v.
                  CENTRAL INDIANA PRESBYTERY
                    DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                           June 2, 2022

SUMMARY OF THE CASE

The genesis of this case is a BCO 31-2 investigation of TE Daniel Herron on
various reports concerning his Christian character. The BCO 15-1 non-judicial
commission, appointed by CIP on September 13, 2019, met with the TE in
question and his accusers over a period of months in the fall of 2019 and made
a full report to CIP’s Church Planting team in January 2020. The report
concluded: “The Commission does not believe there is a ‘strong presumption
of guilt of the party involved.” The Commission added, “[I]t is the judgment
of the commission that there is enough weight to the allegations that pastoral,
corrective measures are in order.”

Presbytery “received” an edited version of the full report containing the two
recommendations. A complaint was ultimately filed with the SJC against
CIP’s not finding “a strong presumption of guilt” regarding the accused and
for not receiving the full report. The SJC referred the matter back to CIP with
instructions to appoint a committee to conduct a BCO 31-2 investigation of
reports concerning the TE and to “pursue whatever other lines of investigation
may be prudent.”

The Investigative Committee (IC), appointed by CIP on March 5, 2021,
reported on May 14, 2021, finding a strong presumption of guilt regarding TE
Herron and recommending that six charges be brought against him. CIP 1)
approved the report and approved a motion to try the case as a committee of
the whole, 2) suspended TE Herron per BCO 31-10 and, 3) released a public
statement about actions taken by CIP. After the suspension, CIP denied TE
Herron access to meetings and minutes from subsequent meetings of CIP. TE
Herron, joined by four others, complained against CIP’s actions.



                                      916
                              APPENDIX T



I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

07/02/2019   Five former members or attenders of a PCA Mission Church
             sent a letter to Central Indiana Presbytery (CIP) accusing a
             Teaching Elder (TE) of alleged sins.

09/13/2019   CIP appointed a non-judicial commission to begin a BCO 31-
                    2 investigation.

11/21/2019   Having met with the accusers of the TE as well as the TE
             himself over the past two months, CIP’s Commission decided
             to interview more witnesses.

01/2020      CIP’s Commission submitted a full report to the CIP Church
             Planting Team: “The Commission does not believe there is a
             ‘strong presumption of guilt of the party involved’ (BCO 31-
             2) with regard to the accusations sexual harassment,
             intimidation, and bullying, or that the TE is guilty of an
             offense as defined in BCO 29 (no violation of divine law,
             heresies, or immoralities).” They then observed, “It is the
             judgment of the commission that there is enough weight to the
             allegations that pastoral, corrective measures are in order.”

02/14/2020   The initial report of the Commission was presented to CIP.
             After objections were raised to the Commission’s initial
             report, the Commission met during lunch and decided to
             withdraw their initial report and present an edited report. This
             edited Commission report was received by CIP. The full
             report of the Commission was never presented to CIP.

02/27/2020   TE Marusich filed a complaint against the actions of CIP. This
             complaint had four allegations: (1) CIP erred in not finding a
             “strong presumption of guilt” against the accused; (2) CIP’s
             Commission erred by exceeding its mandate and taking up
             business not referred to it; (3) CIP’s Commission erred by not
             submitting a full record of its proceedings to the court
             appointing it; (4) CIP’s Commission erred in not delivering
             the full report of their findings to the Presbytery, the accused’s
             court of original jurisdiction.



                                   917
                MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



07/10/2020   CIP met to address the complaint from TE Marusich. The
             presbytery sustained items (2) and (3) and denied items (1)
             and (4).

07/20/2020   TE Marusich carried his complaint regarding items (1) and (4)
             to the General Assembly. The Case was designated as Case
             No. 2020-04.

12/01/2020   The proposed panel decision for Case No. 2020-04 was sent
             to the parties. The CIP moderator called a meeting to
             determine how CIP would proceed with the requirements sent
             down with the SJC’s preliminary panel decision.

01/08/2021   At the called meeting, and following representations from TE
             Marusich, CIP voted to rescind the original commission report
             (vote 23-0-1). CIP moved to dismiss the committee formed to
             rewrite the commission report (voice vote). CIP approved
             referring the case back to the SJC contingent on the full court’s
             acceptance of the proposed panel decision (vote 18-5-2).

02/04/2021   The SJC issued the final ruling for Case No. 2020-04.

02/10/2021   TE Marusich filed charges against TE Herron, citing
             violations of the 5th and 7th Commandments, BCO 21-4.1a,
             and violations of his ordination vows.

02/12/2021   CIP met in executive session to consider the charges brought
             by TE Marusich. The presbytery voted to move to trial (27-
             0-1). First date of trial was set for 03/05/2021.
02/18/2021   CIP called a meeting for 03/05/2021 to discuss CIP
             contracting with Godly Response to Abuse in the Christian
             Environment (GRACE) to investigate charges against TE
             Herron. This meeting was scheduled to precede the start of the
             trial on 03/05/2021. Prior to this meeting of the CIP, a series
             of social media posts going back to December 2020 were
             posted by one of the accusers. Also, certain highly sensitive
             and privileged executive session materials were posted on
             social media

03/02/2021   CIP Stated Clerk distributed documents of motions intended
             to be made at the 03/05/2021 Called Meeting.
                                   918
                              APPENDIX T



03/05/2021   At the called meeting a letter from TE Marusich was read in
             which he communicated his desire to “rescind” his charges
             against TE Herron. A point of order was raised challenging
             the motion made in the letter. Moderator Passwater ruled that
             the motion was in order and his ruling was challenged. The
             ruling was challenged, and the vote (13-15-3) was mistakenly
             ruled by the Moderator as a vote that sustained his ruling.
             Eventually, CIP voted to “endorse the dismissal of the charges
             by TE Marusich by a vote of 25-6-1.

             CIP also passed a motion to form a new IC “to consider
             evidence of a strong presumption of guilt of a chargeable
             offense with regard to allegations against the Christian
             character to TE Dan Herron, concerning accusations of sexual
             harassment and intimidation pursuant to BCO 31-2, and
             Bylaws, IV and in accordance with the directive of the
             Standing Judicial Commission in case 2020-04…” committee
             to investigate the matter and report back to CIP (24-6-2).

03/23/2021   TE Herron reached out to the BCO 31-2 Committee chair TE
             Josh Hollowell to provide his email address and expressed
             willingness to provide any needed information to the
             committee.

04/18/2021   TE Hollowell reached out to TE Herron to update him on the
             proceedings of the Committee and communicated, in part,
             “…I wanted to reach out to you and let you know that we are
             continuing to process all the information provided to us by the
             record of the case for the SJC and investigating any new
             information. At this point we do not plan to reinterview
             anyone that the prior commission had interviewed unless we
             have a clarifying question. We don't want to go over the same
             ground that the previous commission did nor subject anyone
             to more questioning than is necessary. If, however we receive
             new information we may reach out to ask you some questions
             regarding anything new. If you have information that you
             would like to pass on to the Committee please contact me by
             email or phone and provide a short summary of the
             information you would like to pass along so that we can
             discuss how we want to proceed…”


                                  919
                MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



05/12/2021   BCO 31-2 Committee chair TE Josh Hollowell emailed TE
             Herron requesting limited responses to questions from the
             Committee. TE Herron emailed his responses.

05/14/2021   CIP Stated Meeting. 31-2 Committee presented its report
             describing that they believed there was sufficient evidence for
             a strong presumption of guilt. CIP also approved a motion to
             suspend TE Herron from office (BCO 31-10) and to publicly
             distribute an official statement that included information
             about the charges, suspension, and eventual trial of TE
             Herron. CIP declared that the statement was “releaseable [sic]
             to all TE’s and RE’s of CIP and releaseable [sic] to the public
             upon request. The Stated Clerk emailed TE Herron the results
             of the meeting

05/16/2021   Information about the actions taken by CIP appeared on social
             media.

05/20/2021   TE Herron requested minutes of the 05/14/2021 Stated
             Meeting and a copy of the report from the committee that
             conducted the BCO 31-2 investigation. The State Clerk
             denied his request.

06/18/2021   Complainants (TE Herron, et al) filed with CIP a Complaint
             against the action taken on 05/14/2021.

07/07/2021   CIP called meeting to consider the complaint of the actions
             taken on 05/14/2021. The CIP denied all parts of the
             Complaint.

07/13/2021   TE Herron and others bring their Complaint to the Standing
             Judicial Commission.

11/23/2021   Case assigned to Original Panel REs John White, Mel
             Duncan, and E. J. Nusbaum (Alternate) and TEs Sean Lucas
             and Paul Lee (Alternate)

12/21/2021   The Panel was expanded. RE E. J. Nusbaum and TE Paul Lee
             were designated to be primary members. RE Howard
             Donahoe and TE Mike Ross were added as alternates.


                                  920
                                 APPENDIX T



01/17/2022      Panel conducted a Hearing to perfect the Record of the Case.

03/21/2022      Panel conducted Hearing. Hearing was conducted by
                GoToMeeting. Panel members RE White (chairman), RE
                Nusbaum (secretary), RE M. Duncan, TE Lucas, TE Lee, RE
                Donahoe (alternate) and TE Ross (alternate) were present.
                The Complainant, TE Herron was present and accompanied
                by RE Huber and TE O’Bannon. The Respondent was
                represented by TE Holroyd and RE Barber.

II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

    A. Did CIP err when they proceeded to process after hearing the report
       of the Investigative Committee (IC)?
    B. Did CIP err when they suspended TE Dan Herron per BCO 31-10?
    C. Did CIP err when they restricted TE Herron from receiving the report
       of the BCO 31-2 Investigative Committee and the minutes and
       attachments from meetings of CIP?
    D. Did CIP err when they approved and issued a public statement that
       communicated the decision made by CIP on May 14, 2021?

III. JUDGMENTS

    A. No
    B. No
    C. Yes
    D. No

IV. REASONING AND OPINION

Specification A - Proceeding to Process after hearing the Report of the IC.

In this specification of error, the Complainants raise the Constitutional issue
of what constitutes “due diligence and great discretion” and “satisfactory
explanations” concerning an accused in a BCO 31-2 investigation. The BCO
provides neither detailed standards for such investigation nor for what is
required to determine “a strong presumption of the guilt of the party involved.”
Those matters are left to the judgment of the court, which is subject to review
by a higher court.



                                      921
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



In reviewing actions of a lower court, “A higher court should ordinarily exhibit
great deference to a lower court regarding those matters of discretion and
judgment which can only be addressed by a court with familiar acquaintance
of the events and parties.” (BCO 39-3).

In this case, we note that all the documents and interviews of the first non-
judicial commission that investigated TE Herron were provided to the IC. The
IC also conducted additional interviews and received additional documentation.
This additional evidence collected by the IC contained 19 statements in
support of TE Herron and 8 statements providing evidence against him. In
total, the IC reviewed nearly 300 pages of documentation. The documentation
included a seventeen-page letter from the accused, a 56-page transcript of an
interview of the accused and an email response from the accused.

The Complainants argue that the IC 31-2 investigation, in demanding
“satisfactory explanations” concerning the Christian character of the accused,
should have “elicit[ed] appropriate exculpatory communications and
conversations with TE Herron…” Since the BCO is silent on what constitutes
“satisfactory explanations.” it is left to the discretion of the lower court to
judge what constitutes those explanations. Yet, the primary purpose of a BCO
31-2 investigation is to determine whether the threshold of “a strong
presumption of the guilt of the party” is met.

Dr. Morton Smith, in his Commentary on the PCA Book of Church Order,
notes, “The Court may, even when believing that there is no guilt, institute
process for the purpose of vindicating the innocent party. Thus, the Court has
unlimited discretion, except when a strong presumption of guilt has been raised
by investigation.”

A trial allows both the prosecutor and the accused to present their cases under
oath so that those sitting in judgment are able to weigh point-by-point the
totality of the testimony and other evidence. It is for those who sit in judgment
at the trial to be impartial and view the competency of witnesses testimony and
evidence, discounting “accusations from any person who is known to indulge
a malignant spirit towards the accused; who is not of good character; who is
himself under censure or process; who is deeply interested in any respect in
the conviction of the accused; or who is known to be litigious, rash or highly
imprudent.” (BCO 31-8) BCO 32-13 also provides, “In order that a trial be fair
and impartial, the witnesses shall be examined in the presence of the
accused…” and also allows for cross-examination by the parties.


                                      922
                                   APPENDIX T



 Because the Record does not show evidence that clear error was committed
by CIP, the complaint concerning this specification of error is denied.

Specification B - Suspension of TE Herron per BCO 31-10.

BCO 31-10 - “When a member of a church court is under process, all his
official functions may be suspended at the court’s discretion; but this shall
never be done in the way of censure.”

The Complainant contends the imposition of his suspension from official
functions violated BCO 31-10. However, absent some censure statement from
the original court, the intention to censure is difficult to demonstrate or for the
higher court to notice. The Record did not sufficiently demonstrate evidence
warranting finding that Presbytery violated the final clause of BCO 31-10.

We understand a minister’s suspension from “all his official functions” would
certainly feel like a censure, and very likely have a similar effect. The BCO
does not stipulate a deadline for commencing a trial after a prosecutor has been
appointed. And the appeal process takes many months. Furthermore, unless
his church can afford to pay him and his temporary replacement, the non-
disciplinary suspension would likely impact his salary and his family's
finances (unlike ruling elders under similar non-disciplinary suspensions).
And a non-disciplinary suspension could eventually result in the minister
losing his job, even if he eventually was acquitted or prevailed on appeal.
Therefore, courts should be careful to ensure this is “never” done in the way
of censure.

In the Judgment for Issue C, we note that access to presbytery meetings and
minutes is not ordinarily to be treated as one of a minister’s “official functions”
covered in BCO 31-10. He ordinarily still retains those rights even when the
non-censure suspension of BCO 31-10 is imposed.

Because the Record does not show evidence that CIP clearly erred in the
application of BCO 31-10, the Complaint concerning this specification is
denied.

Specification C – Restricting the Complainant from receiving the report of the
BCO 31-2 investigative committee and other minutes and attachments from
meetings of CIP.



                                       923
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



While judicatories are allowed to suspend those under process from their
official functions, following BCO 31-10, this suspension is administrative in
nature. Such suspensions do not have the effect of removing someone as a
member of the body; as a result, as a member of that court, Complainant would
have the same rights to the minutes and reports of the Presbytery as any other
member would have. In this regard, the SJC sustains Complainant on this
point.

By restricting his access to the minutes of the Presbytery, including executive
session minutes, Presbytery demonstrated a “refusal of reasonable indulgence”
to a person against whom process was beginning (BCO 43-2). And by
restricting his access to called meetings, which are themselves public
meetings, Presbytery also created an unreasonable burden on Complainant in
understanding fully what the action of the Presbytery against him was. While
there might be reasons where it would be appropriate to ask Complainant to
recuse himself from executive session meetings where matters of his
disciplinary process would be discussed, Presbytery went too far and created
a potential future ground of appeal if they continued down this path.

That said, the SJC does not agree with the Complainant that he would
necessarily have the right to “the minutes and documents of the BCO 31-2
Committee.” An investigative committee might interview several people who
may or may not have ended up being significant for determining whether there
was a strong presumption of guilt in a certain matter. Likewise, a committee
might collect a range of documents that are not germane to their investigation.
Surely it would be inappropriate to disclose each witness, all testimony, and
every document to an accused individual upon his request. Those witnesses,
documents, and evidence that are germane to the charges and specifications
will be made known in the indictment; at that point, the accused should have
access to those materials to prepare a defense (BCO 32-4, 5, 8).

Specification D – Approval and Release of a Public Statement that
Communicated the Decision Made by CIP on May 14, 2021.

Once again, this issue turns on BCO 39-3(3): “A higher court should ordinarily
exhibit great deference to a lower court regarding those matters of discretion
and judgment which can only be addressed by a court with familiar
acquaintance of the events and parties.” While other judicatories may have
handled the matter differently based on their own local circumstances, CIP
decided to approve and authorize a “public statement, releasable to all TEs and
REs of CIP and releasable to the public upon request”.
                                     924
                                      APPENDIX T



Because this matter was already public, and because the Presbytery needed to
care for the peace, purity, and unity of the Church at large and the churches of
the Presbytery, they exercised their judgment to make a statement on the
matter. Because this is a matter of discretion and judgment, the SJC exhibits
deference to CIP in this matter and rules that it did not err in approving a public
statement in this matter.

Conclusion - In several recent complaints arising from this Presbytery,
procedural confusion has come from allowing people to file BCO 43-1
complaints against some aspect of the judicial process after the court has found
a strong presumption of guilt, and thus, after process has commenced.
Allowing and adjudicating such pre-trial BCO 43-1 complaints could
significantly delay a trial, especially if adjudication of each complaint needs
to wait for the next meeting of presbytery, or wait for an SJC decision. For
example, an accused person might seek to file complaints against:

         1.   the investigative procedures (as in this Case)
         2.   the appointment of a particular prosecutor
         3.   the wording of the indictment
         4.   the appointment of a particular member of the trial commission
         5.   the date of the trial
         6.   any pre-trial rulings of the trial court (allowable defense counsel,
              witness citations, length of briefs, scheduled length of trial, length
              of closing arguments, etc.)

Allowing such pre-trial BCO 43-1 complaints could also ping-pong matters
indefinitely. For example, an accused person might file a BCO 43-1 complaint
against the appointment of a particular prosecutor. If Presbytery sustains it,
then some other presbyter might file a BCO 43-1 complaint against that
decision. And either of those complainants might take their complaint to the
SJC. Theoretically, the matter might never get to trial if objections are handled
as BCO 43-1 complaints rather than as objections the trial court addresses via
BCO 32-14.68


68
         BCO 32-14. “On all questions arising in the progress of a trial, the discussion
     shall first be between the parties; and when they have been heard, they may be
     required to withdraw from the court until the members deliberate upon and decide
     the point.”




                                           925
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Amends - The SJC instructs the Presbytery to proceed to a trial, given that
Presbytery found a strong presumption of guilt on certain allegations on May
14, 2021, and the SJC has declined to sustain the Complaint against those
findings. Absent a confession or the dismissal of all charges, Presbytery does
not have the option to decline to institute process. This is clear in the 1898 F.
P. Ramsay quote below. (Emphasis added throughout.)

        And after an investigation is once originated, the court no
        longer has discretion not to institute process if the
        investigation results in raising a strong presumption of guilt
        of the accused. It appears, then, that, after an investigation, the
        court must always institute process, except where the court
        judges that the investigation fails to result in raising a strong
        presumption of guilt, and, of course, the court may institute
        process, even when the members of the court believe that
        there is no guilt, if they are persuaded that this is desirable for
        the vindication of innocence or for other reasons. The sum of
        the matter is, that the court has unlimited discretion (subject,
        as in all matters, to the review of higher courts), only that it
        has not discretion to raise by investigation a strong
        presumption of guilt and then not institute process. A strong
        presumption means a belief by the members of the court that
        evidence as then known to them would indicate that guilt
        probably exists, unless evidence to the contrary can be
        produced not then known to them. (Ramsey, Exposition of the
        Book of Church Order [1898, pp. 185-186], on RoD, V-2.)

The Record indicates Presbytery adopted the motion below on January 8,
2021, by a vote of 18-5-2, which read:

        Pending the acceptance of the panel decision by the full SJC
        [in Case No. 2020-04 Marusich v. CIP], per BCO 41-2 we
        refer the case [trial] back to the SJC for it to conduct the case
        with process. Out of concern for the spiritual and emotional
        wellbeing of those involved, we ask the SJC to please expedite
        this process.

If Presbytery had filed that Reference, things would have been far
simpler. In addition to this present Complaint, there have been three
others filed with regard to this matter (one prior and two pending), and
this matter has been in various levels of adjudication since 2019. The
                                       926
                                  APPENDIX T



Records of these Cases total over 2500 pages. The Record and the
Hearing on this present Case indicated countless pages of comments
and accusations have regularly appeared on social media and in the
Bloomington press. Indeed, the entire Record of the Case for the
previously decided SJC Case 2020-04 has appeared on a social media
platform - including Presbytery executive session minutes. The peace
and purity of the Church has been disrupted as the resolution of these
issues has been delayed.

Finally, the SJC temporarily suspends all decisions relating to censures against
TE Herron until after the completion of the judicial process growing out of
Presbytery’s BCO 31-2 findings of 05/14/2021.

The SJC notes it has postponed consideration of all pending (i.e., Case Nos.
2021-14, 2021-15, & 2022-02) and future Complaints on any matter related to
TE Daniel Herron or related judicial matters until the completion of the judicial
process growing out of Presbytery’s BCO 31-2 findings of 05/14/2021 and the
adjudication of any subsequent appeal.

The decision was drafted and edited by the Panel and revised by the SJC. The
final decision was approved on the following roll call vote:

    Bankson Concur           S. Duncan Concur              Nusbaum Concur
    Bise Concur              Ellis Concur                  Pickering Absent
    Cannata Recused          Greco Concur                  Ross Concur
    Carrell Concur           Kooistra Concur               Terrell Concur
    Coffin Concur            Lee Absent                    Waters Concur
    Donahoe Concur           Lucas Absent                  White Concur
    Dowling Concur           McGowan Absent                Wilson Concur
    M. Duncan Concur         Neikirk Concur
      (18-0-0)

TE Cannata recused himself because of his relationships with the parties and
their representatives. OMSJC 2.10(d).

                            Concurring Opinion
                           of RE Howie Donahoe

I concurred with the Judgments on Issues A, B, & C but believe further
reasoning is warranted in A & B. I dissented on the Judgment for Issue D
(regarding Presbytery’s press release).
                                      927
                         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



However, before addressing those, it’s worth revisiting a significant
procedural problem. As the Decision implies, much of the procedural
congestion in related cases in this Presbytery arises from what’s known in the
civil courts as “interlocutory appeals.” Seven years ago, I expressed concern
about allowing interlocutory appeals in a concurring opinion in Marshall v.
Pacific. (Case 2013-03, M43GA, p. 547 ff.) And in that Case, a fellow judge’s
dissenting opinion expressed confidence this scenario would be unlikely, or at
least easily managed. But the several complaints out of Central Indiana this
year demonstrate otherwise. To avoid this in the future, perhaps BCO 43-1
could be revised to further restrict such complaints, using something like
what’s shown below:

            43-1. A complaint is a written representation made against
            some act or decision of a court of the Church. It is the right
            of any communing member of the Church in good standing to
            make complaint against any action of a court to whose
            jurisdiction he is subject, except that no complaint is
            allowable in a judicial case in which an appeal is pending.
            However, in matters related to judicial process, no complaint
            is allowable after process has commenced (i.e., after the court
            has directed the appointment of a prosecutor - BCO 31-2; 32-
            2). If a complaint is filed after process has commenced,
            adjudication shall be delayed until after the judicial case has
            been completed or, if an appeal is filed, after it has been
            adjudicated or withdrawn.

In this present Case, 13 months elapsed between when Presbytery voted to
commence process and the SJC denied the accused minister’s Complaint
against investigative procedures. Would a trial be suspended again if someone
filed a pre-trial BCO 43-1 complaint against the appointment of a particular
prosecutor, the trial date, the final wording of the indictment, or the
appointment of some member of the trial commission? 69
69
         In U.S. law, an “interlocutory appeal” is the appealing of a lower court ruling
     to an appellate court prior to the final judgment of the lower court (which is
     essentially what the Complainant did in this present Case.) U.S. civil courts
     sometimes allow such “appeals,” but only if they meet very narrow requirements.
     For example, the U.S. Supreme Court delineated requirements for U.S. federal
     courts, holding that a pre-judgment appeal would be permitted only if:
        1. the outcome of the case would be conclusively determined by the issue;
        2. the matter appealed was collateral to the merits (i.e., of a secondary nature to);
        3. and the matter was effectively unreviewable if immediate appeal were not
                                              928
                                    APPENDIX T



No party – neither the defendant nor some third party - should be granted
appellate review of a decision of a court or its commission via a BCO 43-1
complaint while the judicial case is in process unless there is some clear
demonstration of impending, irreparable harm. The SJC made a similar ruling
in 2015 in Marshall v. Pacific, where an accused person filed a complaint prior
to his trial alleging the indictment was incomplete. The SJC ruled as follows:

         The Complaint is Judicially Out of Order, because it has to do
         with matters in a judicial case that an accused should reserve
         for proper disposal in an appeal, not through a complaint
         (BCO 32-14; 42-3), ...70

We’ll now address Issues A, B and D

Issue A – Investigative Procedures

Limited Guidelines - This Case is one of many that have come to the SJC where
there is disagreement about investigative processes. Because the BCO says
little about how to conduct investigations, presbyteries might consider
adopting something in their standing rules like that employed by another PCA
Presbytery, in which a five-man standing committee has rules and guidelines
for how it commences, conducts, and concludes investigations.
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nJVTcgBLzuwtqnD9hI_SItD5XyVFK
Q6/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=110515225575322482419&rtpof=true&sd=true

“Reports” - Part of the confusion with investigations probably arises from an
overly-broad interpretation of the noun “reports” in BCO 31-2.

         31-2. It is the duty of all church Sessions and Presbyteries to
         exercise care over those subject to their authority. They shall
         with due diligence and great discretion demand from such
         persons satisfactory explanations concerning reports affecting
         their Christian character. (Emphasis added.)


         allowed. (Lauro Lines v. Chasser, 1989) https://supreme.justia.com/cases
         /federal/us/490/495/case.html
   And interlocutory appeals are even rarer in criminal cases. A defendant’s petition
   for permission to appeal a trial court’s pre-verdict ruling usually must demonstrate
   he will be irreparably harmed if he must wait until the end of the trial to appeal.
70
   See also a concurring opinion two years after Marshall: Case 2015-04: Thompson
   v. S. FL., M44GA, p. 515.
                                         929
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



In the history of American Presbyterianism, the BCO word "reports" has
ordinarily referred to widely-known accusations, public "reports," or
allegations of "common fame." It has not referred to every accusation
presented to a Session or a Presbytery. In this present Case, it was not public
rumors that generated the initial investigation, but rather, a letter from five
people. Thus, the letter was more like what’s described in BCO 34-3 (below)
rather than the “reports” of BCO 31-2.

         BCO 34-3. If anyone knows a minister to be guilty of a private
         offense, he should warn him in private. But if the offense be
         persisted in, or become public, he should bring the case to the
         attention of some other minister of the Presbytery.
Who is the “aggrieved” person of BCO 31-2? - While not paramount to Issue
A in this Case, the parties differed in their interpretation of the italicized clause
below in BCO 31-2 and even addressed the question in both of their Briefs.

        BCO 31-2. It is the duty of all church Sessions and
        Presbyteries to exercise care over those subject to their
        authority. They shall with due diligence and great discretion
        demand from such persons satisfactory explanations
        concerning reports affecting their Christian character. This
        duty is more imperative when those who deem themselves
        aggrieved by injurious reports shall ask an investigation.
        (Emphasis added.)

The Complainant (rightly) argued the aggrieved person in view is the subject
of the “reports” in the second sentence. But the Respondent (mistakenly)
argued the italicized clause refers to the authors of those reports. The
“injurious reports” are those alleging something negative about the accused
and not reports of injuries felt by accusers. The reports are “injurious” to the
accused’s character unless investigated and either dismissed or prosecuted.
And for that reason, the investigation is “more imperative” if the accused (the
aggrieved) asks for it.

Issue B - BCO 31-10 contains an important and often disregarded prohibition
regarding administrative (non-censure) suspensions.

        BCO 31-10 - When a member of a church court is under
        process, all his official functions may be suspended at the
        court’s discretion; but this shall never be done in the way of
        censure. (Emphasis added.)
                                        930
                                   APPENDIX T



It is difficult to determine whether a purported non-censure suspension is,
instead, improperly imposed as an unofficial censure. Thus, higher courts will
ordinarily be reticent to overrule such. However, presbyteries should realize
non-censure suspensions will very often have the same effect as a censure,
especially if the accused minister loses his job prior to the conclusion of
process. Presbyteries should heed the 1879 counsel of F.P. Ramsay: “This is
a particular application of the principle that one may have the exercise of his
official functions suspended without censure; but the court should be slow to
do this, unless prudence requires it, lest it work to the prejudice of the accused
or make the court appear precipitate.” Unfortunately, rather than being “slow
to do this,” these non-censure suspensions have seemed to become the rule
rather than the exception in many recent Cases that have come to the SJC.
BCO 31-10 does not require a presbytery to record a reason for why it
administratively suspends a minister pre-trial, and it only requires a simple
majority to do so. However, we note an inconsistency between BCO 31-10 and
BCO 42-6 (which requires such recording).

        BCO 42-6. Notice of appeal shall have the effect of
        suspending the judgment of the lower court until the case has
        been finally decided in the higher court. However, the court
        of original jurisdiction may, for sufficient reasons duly
        recorded, prevent the appellant from approaching the Lord’s
        Table, and if an officer, prevent him from exercising some or
        all his official functions, until the case is finally decided (cf.
        BCO 31-10; 33-4). This shall never be done in the way of
        censure. (Emphasis added.)

It’s unclear why the BCO would require reasons to be “sufficient” and “duly
recorded” when administratively suspending a convicted minister during an
appeal, but not require the same for a minister who is simply accused and
awaiting trial. It seems those should, if anything, be reversed. The legislative
history might explain how we got this inconsistency. 71 72
71
          BCO 31-10 - The current text dates to PCUS 1879, differing from subsequent
   editions only in the capitalization of the word "Church.”
72
          BCO 42-6 - The first sentence of our current BCO 42-6 was added in 1990
   (M18GA, p. 49). The second was added in 1996 (M24GA, p. 60). Here is the
   legislative history.
   1879 If the infliction of the sentence of suspension, excommunication or
          deposition be arrested by appeal, the judgment appealed from shall
          nevertheless be considered as in force until the appeal be issued.

                                        931
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Issue D – I am dissenting in this Judgment because I consider Presbytery’s
post-indictment, pre-trial press release.to have been a clear error of discretion
and judgment (BCO 39-3.3).

The Record contained Presbytery’s Bylaws, which included the following
provision common in many presbyteries: “Rules of Order: The edition of Robert's
Rules of Order used in the General Assembly will govern Presbytery during
the business portion of its meetings unless it is in conflict with the Book of

  1925 Notice of appeal shall have the effect of suspending the judgment of the lower
         court until the case has been finally decided in the higher court. If, however,
         the censure is suspension or excommunication from the sealing ordinances,
         or deposition from office, the court may, for sufficient reasons duly recorded,
         put the censure into effect until the case is finally decided.
  1973 Same text as PCUS Book of 1925. (M1GA, p. 153.)
  1990 Notice of appeal shall have the effect of suspending the judgment of the lower
         court until the case has been finally decided in the higher court. If, however,
         the censure is suspension from the sacraments, and/or his office, or
         excommunication from the sealing ordinances sacraments, or deposition
         from office, the court may, for sufficient reasons duly recorded, put the
         censure into effect until the case is finally decided.
  1996 Notice of appeal shall have the effect of suspending the judgment of the lower
         court until the case has been finally decided in the higher court. If, however,
         the censure is suspension or excommunication from the sealing ordinances,
         or deposition from office, the court may, for sufficient reasons duly recorded,
         put the censure into effect until the case is finally decided. However, the court
         of original jurisdiction may, for sufficient reasons duly recorded, prevent the
         appellant from approaching the Lord's Table, and if an officer, prevent him
         from exercising some or all his official functions, until the case is finally
         decided (cf. BCO 31-10; 33-3). This shall never be done in the way of
         censure.
  The 1996 change to BCO 42-6 was in omnibus package of 11 changes regarding
  disciplinary procedures recommended to the 17 th GA by the Committee of
  Commissioners on Judicial Business. The package was approved and sent down to
  the presbyteries, which approved it by a vote of 37-6. (Changes were made to BCO
  30-1, 30-3, 34-7, 34-8, 36-4, 36-5, 37-1, 37-2, 37-3, 37-7 and 42-6). The 1996
  change (our current version) was recommended by the Ad Interim Committee on
  Judicial Procedures in 1995 and approved by the presbyteries on a 40-14 vote.
  (M23GA, p. 85). The AICJP had provided the following as its reason for the proposed
  change: “In the [BCO 42] chapter as written there is a conflict between the treatment
  of an appealing party, where censures may be enacted before the final resolution of
  the appeal, and other provisions of BCO, where a temporary suspension of privileges
  is permitted while an appeal is processed, but never by way of censure. The
  amendment applies the latter principles consistently.” (M23GA, p. 85)

                                           932
                                      APPENDIX T



Church Order or these by-laws.” Robert’s Rules contains an important provision
that requires a degree of confidentiality that Presbytery did not follow:
        A society has the right to investigate the character of its
        members and officers as may be necessary to the enforcement
        of its own standards. But neither the society nor any member
        has the right to make public any information obtained through
        such an investigation; if it becomes common knowledge
        within the society, it may not be revealed to anyone outside
        the society. Consequently, a trial must always be held in
        executive session, as must the introduction and consideration
        of all resolutions leading up to the trial. RONR (12th ed.) 63:2
         73

Rather than clarify or calming things, Presbytery’s press release seems to have
resulted in greater misunderstandings, as Presbytery actions were interpreted
differently by various press sites and blogs. And the Complainant demonstrated
how these negatively impacted him.

Our BCO does not explicitly prohibit a presbytery from publishing a press
release related to an investigation or an indictment. But it seems the BCO
implies that doing so would be, at best, irregular. BCO 36-2 provides: “In the
case of public offenses, the degree of censure and mode of administering it
shall be within the discretion of the court ...” BCO 36-3 stipulates: “If the
offense is public the Admonition should be administered by the moderator in
presence of the court and may also be announced in public should the court
deem it expedient.” BCO 36-4 specifies: “Definite suspension from office
should be administered in the presence of the court alone or in open session of
the court, as it may deem best, and public announcement thereof shall be at
the court’s discretion.” (All emphases added.) But unlike our present Case,
all those public announcements would follow a finding of guilt and imposition
of censure, not precede it.

  A similar restriction would also apply to any post-conviction press releases: “If
  (after trial) a member is expelled or an officer is removed from office, the society
  has the right to disclose that fact - circulating it only to the extent required for the
  protection of the society or, possibly, of other organizations. Neither the society nor
  any of its members has the right to make public the charge of which an officer or
  member has been found guilty, or to reveal any other details connected with the
  case. To make any of the facts public may constitute libel. A trial by the society
  cannot legally establish the guilt of the accused, as understood in a court of law; it
  can only establish his guilt as affecting the society’s judgment of his fitness for
  membership or office.” RONR (12th ed.) 63:3


                                           933
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Concurring and Dissenting Opinions – Finally, it was troublesome to see in
the Record that the Presbytery Clerk made a unilateral and unexplained
decision to withhold from Presbytery the February 2021 Dissenting Opinion
signed by four SJC judges in Case 2020-04: Marusich v. Central Indiana.
(M48GA, p. 806) SJC Manual 18.12.a describes concurring and dissenting
opinions as “an essential element of the work of the Commission.” In addition,
a concurring or dissenting opinion is regarded as an “appendix” to an SJC
Decision and is to be “promptly sent to the parties.” (OMSJC 17.8.k)
Fortunately, at the upcoming 49th GA, the SJC is recommending a change to
its Manual to require all concurring and dissenting opinions to accompany an
SJC decision (rather than being sent to the parties weeks after the decision has
been sent).


                  CENTRAL INDIANA PRESBYTERY
                    REQUEST FOR REFERENCE
                           June 2, 2022

      The Chairman presented the request for reference from Central Indiana
      Presbytery for the trial at issue in the foregoing Case No. 2021-06. The
      Commission approved a motion to accede to the request and accept the
      reference subject to the following stipulations: Presbytery shall provide
      the Prosecutor for the case; counsel for TE Herron from Case No. 2021-06
      may serve as his counsel at trial; a trial arrangements committee shall be
      appointed by the Chairman to consider arrangements for conducting the
      trial of the and report to the SJC at the earliest possible date; and for
      economy, the Commission takes judicial notice of the Record of the
      Case in Case No. 2021-06 and approves the use and reference of
      materials in that Record in the trial.


                         CASE NO. 2022-01
                        ERIC EAGLE, et al.
                                 v.
                   SAVANNAH RIVER PRESBYTERY
                     DECISION ON COMPLAINT
                            June 2, 2022

       The Officers reviewed the Complaint and found the case
Administratively Out of Order and determined that it cannot be put in order
because the Complaint was not timely filed. OMSJC 9.2. The Complainants
                                      934
                                  APPENDIX T



originally filed this complaint with the SJC on December 15, 2020. (then styled
as Case 2020-10). The SJC ruled Case 2020-10 administratively out of order
as prematurely filed and reset the clock for the filing of that Complaint “so that
timing begins on the later to occur of the notification of: (a) this action by the
SJC (which occurred on October 21, 2021) or (b) ruling by Presbytery on the
Complaint.” Presbytery ruled on the Complaint on October 20, 2020. The
Complaint was filed more than 30 days after the later of those two events and is
therefore not timely (BCO 43-3). For these reasons, the case is dismissed.

The SJC approved this decision on the following roll call vote:

    Bankson Concur            S. Duncan Concur              Nusbaum Concur
    Bise Concur               Ellis Concur                  Pickering Absent
    Cannata Concur            Greco Concur                  Ross Concur
    Carrell Concur            Kooistra Concur               Terrell Concur
    Coffin Concur             Lee Absent                    Waters Concur
    Donahoe Concur            Lucas Absent                  White Concur
    Dowling Concur            McGowan Absent                Wilson Concur
    M. Duncan Concur          Neikirk Concur
      (19-0-0)




                                       935
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                 Attachment

           STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION
 RESPONSE TO COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL BUSINESS
                     June 2, 2022

The SJC is grateful for the opportunity to respond to the individual’s objection
and his request for an “exception of substance” citation to its minutes. For the
reasons outlined below, the SJC proposes that the request should be denied.

A. The request for exception is not timely.

The actions against which objections have been raised were initially approved
in the March 25, 2021 SJC meeting. They were recorded in the SJC’s minutes
as follows:

        The Chair reported that the committee of the whole approved
        a motion to recommend that the Commission rescind the
        declaration that the case is judicially in order, for the limited
        purpose of perfecting the record with answers to written
        questions propounded by members of the Commission.
        OMSJC 7.4(f). The Parliamentarian advised that this motion
        and process were in order. The Chair also reported that the
        committee of the whole approved a motion to recommend the
        statement of the judgment consisting of ROC page 3, lines 8-
        28, reformatted in the proper form for a statement of the issue.
        The Commission further agreed without objection to postpone
        consideration of the final report of the committee of the whole
        until the Commission next meets at the call of the Chair.

        The Chairman appointed the following committee to collect
        and collate questions from members of the Commission and
        to draft parameters to be communicated to Presbytery to
        perfect the Record of the Case: Kooistra (convener), Chapell,
        Waters, Donahoe, Dowling, and Bise. Commissioners’
        questions and proposals should be submitted to the committee
        by Wednesday March 31, 2021

The SJC’s March 25, 2021 minutes were reviewed and approved without
exception by the CCB in May 2021. CCB’s report to the 48th General
Assembly includes the report of its review of the SJC minutes of March 25,
                                      936
                                  APPENDIX T



2021. CCB noted, “The minutes were found to be in order without exception…”
(M48GA, p. 20, 467) Thus, the undated objection lodged in 2022, against the
March 25, 2021 Minutes, is not timely and should be disregarded.

Moreover, at the March 25 meeting, the SJC made specific parliamentary
inquiry regarding the propriety of its actions at the time they were initiated and
received advice that its actions were proper. The SJC relied upon the advice
of its Parliamentarian in the process it initiated on March 25, 2021. While the
actions were unusual, the SJC thought it best and most efficient to gather as
much information as possible to have the most complete Record possible,
given the posture of the case, the time devoted to it, and the attention to the
case from across the denomination,

In communicating this action regarding the Record of the Case to the parties,
the SJC explained its reasoning for requesting additional information. (See
Section C(5) below.) The purpose of the SJC’s actions against which
objections have been raised was to obtain the most complete and current
Record for rendering a decision.

B. The requesting party failed or refused to present his arguments to the
   SJC.

It is noteworthy that the party making the instant objection and request to the
CCB was the representative of the Complainant, TE Speck, in the proceedings
before the SJC. As such, he had the opportunity to participate fully in the
hearing, briefing, and submissions of TE Speck to the SJC. The objections
lodged with the CCB in 2022 were never presented to the SJC during the
course of the proceedings before it or any time after. For this reason, the CCB
could consider those objections waived by the failure to present them to the
SJC for consideration.

C. The request for an exception is based on multiple misunderstandings
   and misapplications of the provisions of the OMSJC.

The claims and contentions in the request include several erroneous assertions
regarding the language and application of the OMSJC provisions cited.

1. Purported 40-day requirement - The requesting party contends: “OMSJC
   10.10 requires that when a case is heard by the full SJC, a preliminary
   decision must be submitted within 40 days after the hearing date.”


                                       937
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



(Request, p. 1 line 45. See also p. 2 lines 26, 32-34, 37; p. 3 line 14; p, 5
lines 44-45).

He is mistaken. OMSJC 10.10 only applies to Panels. OMSJC 14.4.b
applies to hearings before the full SJC, and there is no 40-day post-hearing
requirement when a matter is heard by the full SJC. OMSJC 14.6 simply
stipulates: “As soon as the judgment is rendered, when the complaint is
heard by the full Commission rather than by a Judicial Panel, the Chairman
shall designate a member or committee of members voting with the
majority to prepare a proposed written decision.” No deadline is stipulated
for when a proposed decision must be submitted or adopted. The operative
sections of the OMSJC provide:

       OMSJC 10.10 AFTER THE ORAL ARGUMENTS. A
       Judicial Panel immediately after hearing the oral arguments
       of the parties, shall go into closed session and discuss the
       issues in the case. In that discussion, the Panel may (1)
       frame the issues, (2) vote on a judgment and (3) announce
       these to the parties. Or, the Panel may take all these matters
       under advisement and reconvene within the next 20 days, as
       often as necessary, to frame the issues and render a
       judgment. This "reconvening" may be held by telephone
       conference call. The Chairman of the Panel shall designate
       a Panel member voting with the majority to prepare a
       written decision. This [Panel] decision shall be mailed or
       sent by electronic means to the Stated Clerk of the General
       Assembly within 40 days from the date the Panel heard the
       oral arguments. Any Panel member may file, within said 40
       day period, a concurring or dissenting opinion which shall
       be appended to the decision. (Emphasis added.)

       OMSJC 14.4 AFTER THE ORAL ARGUMENTS

          a. After the oral arguments have been completed and if
             the complaint is being heard by a Judicial Panel, the
             Panel shall proceed under OMSJC 10.10.
          b. After the oral arguments have been heard and if the
             complaint is being heard by the full Commission
             rather than by a Judicial Panel the Commission shall
             go into closed session to discuss the complaint and
             consider its merits.
                                   938
                                      APPENDIX T



                 c. When the Judicial Panel acting under OMSJC 10.10
                    is ready to vote or when the full Commission has
                    completed its discussion under Section 14.4.b, above,
                    the vote shall be taken, without further debate, as to
                    what disposition should be made of the complaint.

      The SJC did not “complete its discussion under Subsection 14.4.b” until its
      meeting on October 21, 2021 after receiving the proposed decision from the
      Drafting Committee randomly selected at the SJC meeting on July 13,
      2021. When the full SJC hears a case, it is not unusual for a final decision
      to follow several months after the hearing.

      The request for an exception also cites OMSJC 17.9.a (p. 2 line 25, and
      below), but that subsection does not set any time requirement for SJC to
      render a post-hearing decision or to adopt a final decision when the matter
      is heard by the full SJC. The Operating Manual provides:

             OMSCJ 17.9 a. In the event of a hearing by the Full
             Commission where the case was not heard by a judicial
             panel, the Commission shall issue to the parties a
             preliminary judgment. [See item 6 below.]

      The time spent reaching a decision did not prejudice the Complainant in the
      case. The SJC’s action reopening the Record of the Case and allowing the
      parties to submit additional information had the effect of resetting the
      deadline outlined in the OMSJC for decision making. The SJC proceeded
      as expeditiously as possible in deciding the case. The subcommittee
      compiling questions completed its report in 19 days, the SJC meeting to
      consider that report occurred 17 days later, and the SJC letter was sent to
      the parties on or about April 30, 2021.74 In late May 2021, the Presbytery
      submitted its response, with TE Johnson’s answers, and the Complainant
      and Respondent both filed Addendum Briefs. At a reconvened SJC meeting
      on July 13, the SJC’s Chairman appointed a drafting committee of five SJC

74
           The SJC met on April 30, 2021, after the deadline for submitting minutes to
     the CCB for the 2021 GA. The CCB met on May 3, 2021, and thus did not have the
     SJC-approved Minutes of the meeting, which had only occurred three days prior.
     The April 30 Minutes were approved by the SJC at its meeting on July 13, 2021.
     (Minutes, p. 3 line 15: “The SJC approved the minutes of its April 30, 2021 meeting
     without objection.”) The SJC does not submit Minutes to CCB until they have been
     reviewed and approved by the SJC.

                                           939
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    members, drawn randomly, to prepare a proposed decision. That drafting
    committee filed its report on September 21 and a final decision was adopted
    by the SJC at its stated meeting on October 21, 2021. (48th GA
    Commissioner Handbook, p. 2046.) No party was prejudiced by the
    additional time spent in the decision making process.

 2. OMSJC 9.4 (below) gives parties the right, after the Record is perfected, to
    file briefs and present oral arguments at a hearing, Thus, the requestor is
    correct when he contends the provisions cited by the SJC its May 3, 2021
    letter (OMSJC 11.1.e and 7.4.e.(3)) do not ordinarily “envision the ROC
    being amended after the hearing on a case has been concluded.” However,
    in this instance, the SJC made it clear to the parties that they would retain
    the rights of OMSJC 9.4 after the Record had been reopened and perfected:

             OMSJC 9.4 If it is determined that the case should be
             heard by the Full Commission, the parties shall be notified
             and a full copy of the Record of the Case shall be sent to
             each member of the Commission. When the Record of the
             Case has been perfected under OMSJC 7, and when the
             parties have had opportunity to file briefs under OMSJC
             8.1, the case shall be docketed for hearing by the Full
             Commission at its next stated meeting, or at a called
             meeting set to hear the case.

    TE Speck and his representative chose to file an Addendum Brief after the
    Record was perfected but declined to request an additional hearing. These
    facts were included in the Summary of the Facts in the SJC’s Decision in
    Case 2020-12. (49th GA Commissioner Handbook, p. 2046) Thus, the SJC
    complied with OMSJC 9.4.

3. OMSJC 7.4.f provides: “The Judicial Panel, or the Commission if the case
   is to be heard by the Commission, may extend any of the deadline dates in
   this section [for perfecting the Record] if it determines that so doing is in
   the interest of justice.” While this ordinarily applies to perfecting the
   Record prior to the initial hearing, the same principle applies in this Case.

4. The requesting party asserts: “And in any case, neither party in the case
   requested that the ROC be amended following the hearing on March 25,
   2021” (p. 2 line 41; p. 3 line 4). But neither the SJC nor a Panel needs
   permission from the parties to delete or add material to the Record that is
   relevant to the Case.
                                       940
                                 APPENDIX T




          OMSJC 7.4.b - The hearing body may delete any portions
          of the Record as submitted that violate justice or due
          process, a provision of the BCO or Roberts Rules of Order,
          or that are extraneous to the matter before the Commission.
          The hearing body may also require the addition of material
          to the Record that is relevant to the Case. Deletions and
          additions shall always be recorded in the minutes of the
          hearing body, with the approved rationale for the change.
          Any deletions or additions shall be reported to the parties,
          and may be addressed in argument from the parties in any
          hearing requested by a party on the ROC.

5. The request concedes the following: “The SJC could have ruled that the
   ROC was insufficient and remand the case to MOP with direct instructions
   with proposed questions to further investigate the allegations raised against
   TE Johnson” (p. 3 line 55). That is not substantially different from what the
   SJC did. Below is the text of the May 3, 2021 letter from the SJC to the
   Presbytery’s Representative, which was also sent to the Complainant.

            In the SJC’s deliberations on Case 2020-12, the SJC
            decided the Record does not yet appear to be “complete
            and sufficiently documented” (OMSJC 11.1.e) and that
            fairness and justice dictate the accused should have a
            chance to provide additional documentation for the
            Record (per the principle of OMSJC 7.4.e.(3)) Therefore,
            the SJC rescinded the SJC Officers’ previous ruling that
            the Record was complete and sufficiently documented,
            thereby also suspending the ruling that the Case was
            judicially in order at present. Here is the procedure we
            will now follow.
                  We are sending the attached questions to you as
            Presbytery’s Representative with a request that you invite
            TE Johnson to consider providing written answers, which
            would be added to the Record per OMSJC 7.4.b: “The
            hearing body may also require the addition of material to
            the Record that is relevant to the Case.” We have copied
            the Complainant on this letter.
                  We understand that you, as Presbytery’s
            Representative, are empowered to represent Presbytery in
            the perfection of the Record. Note that Question #15 in
                                      941
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         the “Additional/General” category calls for a response
         from Presbytery’s Representative. It is also included in
         the list for TE Johnson, in case he needs to assist you with
         the answer.
                If TE Johnson chooses to answer the attached
         questions, please send his response document to the SJC
         within 14 days after his confirmed receipt of the
         Questions. Please use the email addresses below. If TE
         Johnson is able to respond before the deadline, we would
         welcome it. If TE Johnson declines, please notify us
         promptly.
                If a Response Document is provided, it would be
         added to the Record, but there would not be a need to re-
         brief or have another Hearing. However, if either you or
         the Complainant wish to file an addendum to your
         previous Brief, dealing only with any additional
         information provided by TE Johnson, the Complainant’s
         filing deadline would be seven (7) days after his receipt
         of the Response Document from the SJC, and the
         Respondent’s would be ten (10) days after his receipt of
         the Response Document from the SJC. Any such
         additional Briefs are limited to five-pages.
                If there is no Response Document to add to the
         Record, the SJC Chairman would reconvene a SJC
         meeting and the SJC would plan to continue with post-
         hearing adjudication of the Complaint.
                The SJC does not believe another hearing is
         required, even if TE Johnson responds to the questions.
         However, the SJC would schedule another Hearing, on
         the additional material only, if requested by one of the
         parties within 7 days after his receipt of the last additional
         Brief filed.

The introduction to the SJC’s 25 Questions read as follows:

         The SJC believes it is necessary to attempt to clarify the
         Record of the Case because its magnitude (over 600 pages
         covering multiple years of writing, speaking, and judicial
         processes) makes it difficult to ascertain if specific
         representations of perspectives of TE Johnson are his


                                    942
                                 APPENDIX T



           actual or present theological convictions. We understand
           from the Record:

             - he has acknowledged some of his perspectives
               have matured over time;
             - he has acknowledged some were poorly
               stated due to time limits, situational pressures,
               or extemporaneity;
             - some representations of perspectives are
               made unclear by imprecision or disagreement
               over what aspect of sin is being referenced
               in specific statements;
             - some representations have been extrapolated
               by critics but denied by Johnson.

           Thus, the SJC offers TE Johnson the opportunity to
           answer questions with reference to the specific
           Allegations in the Complaint now before the
           Commission. Below are 25 questions arranged by the
           Allegations, with a fifth category titled “Additional
           /General.”

  Neither the Complainant nor the requesting party (his representative in the
  Complaint) ever registered any objection after being notified of this
  procedure. For example, there is no objection of any sort in the
  Complainant’s Addendum Brief of May 27, 2021. It was not until after the
  requesting party learned of the SJC’s final decision that he registered any
  objection to the procedure. And he registered his objection with the CCB,
  not the SJC, and apparently almost six months after the decision was
  published.

6. The requestor contends the SJC never sent the parties a “preliminary
   judgment” after the SJC’s October 21, 2021, meeting at which it was
   adopted. (p. 4 lines 15-50)

         OMSJC 17.9.a In the event of a hearing by the Full
         Commission where the case was not heard by a judicial
         panel, the Commission shall issue to the parties a
         preliminary judgment. Within 14 days after receiving the
         preliminary judgment, a party may request reconsideration
         of the judgment by filing a supplemental brief as set forth in
                                     943
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



          OMSJC 8.2. This supplemental brief shall state the reasons
          for requesting reconsideration of the preliminary judgment.
          The commission at its next meeting shall consider the
          request for reconsideration. Reconsideration of the
          preliminary judgment shall be granted only by majority vote
          of the Full Commission.

The SJC’s decision was transmitted to the parties and their representatives on
October 22, 2021. The cover letter transmitting the decision was specifically
addressed and delivered to the requesting party lodging this objection to CCB.
(See Exhibit A attached, p. 2206.) In that letter, the Stated Clerk expressly
provided notice and an opportunity for reconsideration. The Clerk wrote,
“OMSJC 17.9(a) affords parties the opportunity to request reconsideration in
a case. Should you wish to do so, please note the deadline and follow the
procedure outlined in OMSJC 17.9(a).” Thus, contrary to his assertion in his
request to the CCB, the requesting party had notice and an opportunity to
request reconsideration before the SJC and declined to do so. Neither party
nor their representatives requested rehearing or reconsideration. It matters
little whether the letter from the Clerk’s office called the Decision a
“preliminary judgment.” Instead of timely requesting reconsideration before
the SJC, the requesting party delayed such a request and presented it to some
members of CCB more than five months after receiving the SJC’s Decision.
This request inaccurately alleged that the SJC had failed to afford the
Complainant an opportunity to request reconsideration. The effect of
withholding such a request from the SJC would be to gain a reconsideration
improperly through the CCB, when it was expressly made available, but never
requested, through the SJC.

D. The claims presented in the request do not warrant rehearing
the case.

   RAO 19-5 stipulates:

        The [SJC] minutes shall be examined [by CCB] for
        conformity to this Manual of the Standing Judicial
        Commission and RAO 17, violations of which shall be
        reported as “exceptions” as defined in RAO 14-11.d.(2).

   RAO 14-11(d)(2) defines “exceptions” as follows:



                                     944
                                APPENDIX T



       Exceptions: Violations of the Assembly’s Guidelines for
       Keeping Minutes of Permanent Committees of the General
       Assembly, prejudicial misstatements of fact, and actions
       which in substance appear not to conform to the Standards of
       the Presbyterian Church in America, or to be out of accord
       with the deliverances of the General Assembly, should be
       reported under this category.

  At best, the issues identified in the objection are procedural in nature, not
  substantive or substantial. The objection does not identify any prejudice or
  harm to the Complainant. Even if we granted that some variation from the
  OMSJC exists, it is procedural, not substantive in nature. As outlined
  above, the additional time devoted to perfecting the Record and formulating
  a decision was warranted and not prejudicial to any party. The issues
  presented in the objection do not rise to the level of “exceptions,” and
  certainly none warranting rehearing of the case.

  As noted above, the timing of the decision making process and delivery of
  the final decision were warranted by the complexity of the case and the
  multiplicity of facts and issues presented. The SJC has recently employed
  a similar procedure in other cases in which additional information was
  requested to complete the record of a case. See Aven/Dively v. Ohio
  Valley Presbytery, M44GA at 503-504; Barnes v. Heartland Presbytery,
  M44GA at 480 and following; Fordice v. Pacific Northwest Presbytery,
  M45GA at 532. In those instances, CCB did not note any exceptions to the
  SJC’s employment of similar procedures. While such requests are not
  typical, they do aid the decision making process by ensuring that records
  are complete.

E. Approval of the request as submitted would constitute an unwise
precedent.

  Historically, neither the parties nor their representatives have enjoyed the
  right to post-decision petitions for CCB review the SJC’s decision making
  practice. To allow such in this instance would set a dangerous precedent in
  which any party or party representative could attempt to gain an extra-
  constitutional outlet for judicial review.




                                     945
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



CONCLUSION

In conclusion, the SJC has five primary concerns with this objection and its
request for the CCB to rule that the SJC violated the OMSJC:

     1. The request is not timely.
     2. The requesting party failed or refused to present his arguments to the
        SJC.
     3. The request for a citation is based on multiple misunderstandings and
        misapplications of the provisions of the OMSJC.
     4. The request’s claims do not warrant rehearing the case.
     5. And approval of the request as submitted would establish a dangerous
        precedent.

Therefore, the SJC respectfully requests that CCB deny this objection and its
request for an RAO 17-1 “exception” with regard to this Case.

Respectfully submitted,
/s/ TE Fred Greco, Chairman                /s/ RE Sam Duncan, Secretary
/s/ RE John Bise, Vice Chairman            /s/ RE Jack Wilson, Asst. Secretary




                                     946
                             APPENDIX U

           RESOLUTION OF THANKS
    FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA
               June 2022
“Ascribe to the LORD” Commissioners of the 49th General Assembly,
“ascribe to the LORD glory and strength. Ascribe to the LORD the glory due
his name; worship the LORD in the splendor of holiness.” (Psalm 29:2)

This year, the PCA has convened our General Assembly in Birmingham,
Alabama. This is the fourth time this great city has hosted our national
meeting, and each visit evokes memories of our denomination’s founding. In
December 1973, desiring to worship and serve in a church body that was
faithful to the scriptures and true to our Reformed convictions, our inaugural
Assembly was held in Birmingham and hosted by Briarwood Presbyterian
Church. The Honorable Jack Williamson was elected moderator, and the
church then known as the National Presbyterian Church formally conducted
business for the first time.

It was our pleasure to return to Birmingham this year and join our hearts and
voices to ascribe to the Lord the glory due his name. We are grateful to the
host committee from Evangel Presbytery for so skillfully enabling us to do so.
The host committee was very capably led by its Co-Chairmen Daniel
Leavenwood and Taylor Denard, family program chairs Bobby Parks, Donna
Evans, Cindy Ball, and Jason Ellerbee, plus Steve Whitmer and David Driskill,
who oversaw our worship. These servants, along with all other members of
each sub-committee and a host of volunteers from local churches, have labored
well for the benefit and practical service to this General Assembly. To these
brothers and sisters, we extend our heartfelt thanks.

We want to extend our love and thanks to Dr. Roy Taylor, our long time Stated
Clerk and outgoing Moderator, who capped his honorable service to our
denomination by, along with Rev. Elbert McGowan, Jr., and Rev. Kevin
DeYoung, preaching God’s word to us. These pastors blessed us with Christ-
honoring sermons, and the musicians and liturgists led us into rich times of
worship and praise to our God. Our gratitude goes out to all who led us. We
particularly want to thank the staff of the Administrative Committee, who


                                     947
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



serve this church so well and who have worked so hard to plan and execute
this our largest-ever Assembly with its unique challenges.
Finally, we wish to express our sincere thanks to the chairs and members of
the various committees that met as part of this General Assembly: the
Committees of Commissioners, Overtures, Review of Presbytery Records,
Committee on Constitutional Business, Theological Examining Committee,
and the Nominating Committee.

Mr. Moderator, we move that this motion be received with thanksgiving and
acclamation.

RE Phil VanValkenburg, Missouri Presbytery
TE Jon Medlock, Northern California Presbytery




                                    948
                            APPENDIX V

    REPORT OF THE AD INTERIM COMMITTEE
  ON DOMESTIC ABUSE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT
   TO THE FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
  OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA
                   (2022)
The Ad Interim Committee to study and report on domestic abuse and sexual
assault in the church was created at the 47th General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church in America that met in June 2019 in Dallas, Texas, when
the following overture was adopted (M47GA, pp. 90-91):

   1. That the 47th General Assembly create a seven-man Study
      Committee on Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault tasked
      to accomplish the following:
      a. The Committee shall prepare an annotated
          bibliography of resources the Committee endorses on
          topics related to child abuse and sexual assault,
          domestic abuse and sexual assault, and domestic
          oppression. The annotated bibliography should also
          include pastoral resources for the care of victims of
          these sins, as well as ministry and counsel for those
          overtaken by these sins.
      b. The Committee shall report regarding best practices
          and guidelines that could be helpful for elders,
          Sessions, Presbyteries, and agencies for protecting
          against these sins and for responding to them.
          However, no practice, policy, or guideline will be
          proposed for adoption or approval. It is simply
          information, which shall not be binding or obligatory
          in any sense.
      c. The Committee may recommend to the 48th GA any
          statement(s) it believes would be prudent and
          warranted for the Assembly to adopt.
   2. The 47th GA authorizes the GA Moderator to appoint the
      seven voting members of this Committee, per RAO 9-4 and
      RAO 19-1 (Robert's Rules, RONR, 11th ed., pp. 174-175,
      pp. 495-496, and p. 579).

                                    949
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



      a. These members shall be PCA teaching elders or PCA
           ruling elders, and the Committee shall include at least
           three of each. (Anyone may suggest names to the
           Moderator.)
      b. The 47th GA authorizes the Moderator to make his
           appointments after the 47th GA adjourns.
   3. The 47th GA authorizes the Moderator to appoint others to
      serve the Committee as non-voting advisors, regardless of
      denominational affiliation or gender. The 47th GA
      recommends the Moderator consider appointing, as
      advisors, at least two subject-matter experts and at least
      two women.
   4. The budget for the Study Committee shall be $25,000 and
      that funds be derived from gifts to the AC designated for
      that purpose.

The Committee is comprised of the following members and advisors:
Teaching Elders
Rev. Dr. Timothy R. LeCroy, Missouri Presbytery, Chair
Rev. Dr. Lloyd Pierson, Rocky Mountain Presbytery
Rev. Shane Michael Waldron, Rocky Mountain Presbytery
Rev. T. Cal Boroughs (Hon. Ret.), Tennessee Valley Presbytery

Ruling Elders
Dr. Kelly H. Dehnert, Covenant Presbyterian Church, Lander, WY, Secretary
Dr. David R. Haburchak, MD, East Cobb Presbyterian Church, Marietta, GA
Mr. Robert D. Goudzwaard, Christ Covenant PCA, Matthews, NC

Advisory Members
Mrs. Ann Maree Goudzwaard, MDiv Counseling
Executive Director Help[H]er Resources
Member, Christ Covenant Presbyterian Church, Matthews, NC

Mrs. Darby A. Strickland, MDiv Counseling
Christian Counseling Educational Foundation Faculty
Member, Cornerstone Presbyterian Church, Center Valley, PA

Dr. Barbara W. Shaffer, PhD, Psychologist
Member, Faith Presbyterian Church, Wilmington, DE

Dr. M. Diane Langberg, PhD, Psychologist
                                    950
                                 APPENDIX V



Director, Diane Langberg and Associates
Member, Calvary Presbyterian Church, Willow Grove, PA

Mrs. Rachael J. Denhollander, JD
Member, Reformed Baptist Church of Louisville, Louisville, KY

Biographical information for each member and advisor is contained in
Attachment 12.

The Committee met thirteen times in person and via video conference and has
produced the following report for the General Assembly. This report was
unanimously adopted by the Committee.

Due to the fact that the 47th General Assembly expressly forbade the
committee from proposing any “practice, policy, or guideline . . . for adoption
or approval,” the committee will not be bringing any recommendations to the
Assembly. Instead, we offer the following advice to presbyteries, sessions, and
other ministries within the PCA:

    1. That all elders in the Presbyterian Church in America assiduously
       study this report and consider its advice when shepherding the flock
       of God;
    2. That Presbyteries and Sessions consider using this report to train their
       members and those seeking ordination in the PCA in order to be ready
       for situations that will likely arise during their ministries;
    3. That Sessions consider using this report to inform their congregational
       members so that they will be better able to protect, identify, and
       respond well to abuse when it arises;
    4. That all Presbyteries, churches, and other ministries in the PCA
       develop robust policies for both the prevention of and response to
       abuse;
    5. That competent third parties be engaged by Presbyteries, churches,
       and other PCA ministries when allegations of abuse arise;
    6. That Presbyteries, churches, and other PCA ministries share
       information regarding helpful pastoral, sessional, and third-party
       resources and regularly set aside funds for engaging those that can
       provide competent assistance and, if necessary, conduct investigation
       of alleged abuse;
    7. That all ministers, elders, Presbyteries, Sessions, Permanent
       Committees and Agencies, and all other PCA ministries inform


                                     951
               MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   themselves as to the particular laws regarding mandatory reporting to
   the civil magistrate in their civil jurisdictions;
8. That a Permanent Committee or Agency of the PCA consider forming
   an office of abuse prevention and response in order to serve the
   denomination when needs arise; and
9. That the 50th General Assembly of the PCA receive overtures from
   the lower courts to perform a denomination-wide assessment of the
   state of abuse in the PCA. One aspect of the overtures might be to
   create a committee tasked with overseeing the work.




                                952
                                                 APPENDIX V



                                            Table of Contents

INTRODUCTION
   1. The Structure of the Ad Interim Committee Report on Domestic
      Abuse and Sexual Assault .............................................................. 955
   2. How To Read This Report.............................................................. 955
   3. Introduction to Terminology .......................................................... 956
   4. Case Studies .................................................................................. 957

SECTION ONE: Biblical and Confessional Foundations for Understanding
Abuse ........................................................................................................... 957
   Conclusion .......................................................................................... 1045

SECTION TWO: Domestic Abuse............................................................ 1047
   1. Summary Description of Domestic Abuse ................................... 1047
   2. Expressing God’s Heart................................................................ 1048
   3. Recognition .................................................................................. 1049
   4. Responding ................................................................................... 1061
   5. Reporting ...................................................................................... 1064
   6. Redemptive Shepherding.............................................................. 1069
   7. Case Study .................................................................................... 1087

SECTION THREE: Women Who Abuse.................................................. 1089
   1. Introduction .................................................................................. 1089
   2. Biblical Examples......................................................................... 1094
   3. Abuse? Or a Response to Abuse?................................................. 1099
   4. Case Study .................................................................................... 1102

SECTION FOUR: Adult Sexual Abuse .................................................... 1104
   1. Summary Description of Sexual Abuse ....................................... 1104
   2. Expressing God’s Heart................................................................ 1105
   3. Recognition and Impacts of Sexual Abuse ................................... 1106
   4. Responding to an Adult Sexual Abuse Disclosure or Discovery . 1110
   5. Reporting ...................................................................................... 1117
   6. Redemptive Shepherding.............................................................. 1120
   7. Prevention of Sexual Abuse ......................................................... 1128
   8. Case Study .................................................................................... 1129

SECTION FIVE: Child Abuse .................................................................. 1132
   1. Summary Description of Child Abuse ......................................... 1132
   2. Expressing God’s Heart................................................................ 1132
                                                        953
                           MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



     3.    Recognition of Child Abuse and Neglect .....................................1133
     4.    Responding to a Child Abuse Disclosure or Discovery ................1139
     5.    Reporting Child Abuse and Neglect .............................................1145
     6.    Redemptive Shepherding ..............................................................1153
     7.    Child Abuse Prevention ................................................................1157
     8.    Case Studies ..................................................................................1159

SECTION SIX: The Misuse of Spiritual Authority ...................................1163
   1. Summary Description of Misuse of Spiritual Authority .............1163
   2. Expressing God’s Heart ..............................................................1164
   3. Recognition of the Misuse of Spiritual Authority .......................1165
   4. Responding to Reports of the Misuse of Spiritual Authority ......1171
   5. Reporting .....................................................................................1174
   6. Redemptive Shepherding ............................................................1179
   7. Prevention of the Misuse of Spiritual Authority .........................1182
   8. Case Studies ................................................................................1185

ATTACHMENTS ......................................................................................1190
    Attachment 1: Definitions ................................................................1190
    Attachment 2: DSM Definitions ..................................................... 1201
    Attachment 3: Child Abuse Definitions ...........................................1203
    Attachment 4: Signs of Child Abuse ................................................1206
    Attachment 5: Consequences of Child Abuse ..................................1212
    Attachment 6: Comprehensive Child Protection Policy ..................1214
    Attachment 7: Myths about Abuse ...................................................1218
    Attachment 8: Shepherding the Whistleblower ...............................1223
    Attachment 9: Forgiveness...............................................................1224
    Attachment 10: Repentance .............................................................1229
    Attachment 11: Divorce and Domestic Abuse .................................1232
    Attachment 12: Committee Bios ......................................................1244
    ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY ..................................................1246




                                                    954
                                  APPENDIX V



                              INTRODUCTION

1. The Structure of the Ad Interim Study Committee Report on
Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault

This report is divided into two main sections:

        1. Biblical and theological foundations of understanding abuse
          (Section One), and
        2. Practical pastoral aspects of abuse in the church (Sections Two
          through Six).

The biblical and theological foundations section articulates a rationale for
this topic. This section may also serve as a reference for instances of judicial
process. Relevant confessional material further provides an understanding of
abuse from our denomination’s shared theological commitments.

The practical pastoral sections that follow build on the theology of abuse,
providing information for how to understand, prevent, and respond to various
forms of abuse. There are sections discussing abuse perpetrated against
adults, abuse perpetrated against children, and the misuse of spiritual
leadership.

Included in the attachments are material that cover various important
practical matters pertinent to the main body of the report that can serve as
reference material.

Cross references between the sections help aid the reader.

2. How To Read This Report

This report is designed to be utilized in two ways:

    ●   Read straight through as a monograph, and
    ●   Serve as a reference.

Reading the report straight through will help inform the reader of the relevant
subjects related to abuse and the church. It will also serve to train officers and
leaders on the issue of abuse. Referencing the report will serve the leaders
when related questions arise in the life of the church.


                                       955
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



3. Introduction to Terminology

“Abuse” comes from the Latin abutor, which means to misuse. In a general
sense the word can be used to denote misuse of a thing, as in abuse of privilege,
substance abuse, or prosecutorial abuse. In this report the word is used in its
more technical sense, referring to “persistent maltreatment that causes lasting
damage.” In this sense, abuse is a misuse of power. Misuse of power can take
several forms (physical, verbal, positional, etc.), but the essence of abuse is
that it is a misuse of power which wounds another person physically,
emotionally, psychologically, and spiritually.

The word “abuse” appears in the English Standard Version five times, two of
which can be interpreted according to the subject matter of this report.1
However, the most common word Scripture uses for abuse is “oppression,”
appearing 116 times in the ESV. The Hebrew word for oppression is ‫ָענָה‬
(‘anah) which means “affliction” or “humiliation.” When used in the Piel,
oppression often means to afflict by mistreating. (Piel is a verbal form in
Hebrew that indicates intensiveness.) Examples of this usage are when Sarah
mistreats Hagar, Laban charges Jacob not to oppress his daughters, the
oppression of the Israelites by the Egyptians, and the command in Exodus
22:22-23 not to oppress orphans and widows. The biblical definition,
therefore, is “to afflict by mistreatment.” “Oppression” is also the word that
the Larger Catechism uses for abuse, appearing in WLC 136 and WLC 142.
This report will use the terms “abuse” and “oppression” interchangeably to
refer to the biblical and confessional understanding outlined below.

For the purposes of this report, all forms of physical and non-physical
(emotional, psychological, spiritual) abuse will be considered equally sinful.
Manipulation, physical force, words, finances, authority, religion, position,
and inappropriate sexual contact are all tools that might be implemented by
those who misuse their power and control. When someone seeks power and
control over another for their own gain, the result is harm. Scripture tells us
that the fundamental issue is the heart of a person who diminishes another by
using any of these tactics rather than the supposed severity of the method
(Matt. 15:19).

For a more comprehensive treatment of definitions, please see the glossary of
terms in Attachment 1.2

   1
     The two are the crimes of Gibea who abused the Levite’s concubine (Jud. 19:25),
and where Paul says that abusive people will abound in the last days (2 Tim. 3:2).
   2
     See Attachment 1: Definitions.
                                        956
                                    APPENDIX V



4. Case Studies

The case studies in this report are based on actual circumstances that have
occurred in the PCA. However, names, dates, participants, and details have
been rearranged and/or changed in order to protect the people associated. To
the best of our ability, we have sought to honor the privacy and dignity of the
victims and survivors. The integrity of this report and its ministry to people in
crisis is of utmost concern to the contributors. Resemblance in these stories to
actual persons and/or events should be considered coincidental.


SECTION ONE: BIBLICAL AND CONFESSIONAL FOUNDATIONS
FOR UNDERSTANDING ABUSE

Elders in the Presbyterian Church in America take the vow to “sincerely
receive and adopt the Confession of Faith and the Catechisms of this Church,
as containing the system of doctrine taught in the Holy Scriptures,” (BCO 21-
5, 24-6). Therefore, the Larger Catechism’s teachings (hereafter, WLC) on the
Ten Commandments are the official ethical teachings of the PCA. As such, the
WLC serves as the basis for how elders are to engage in church discipline.

BCO 27-1 teaches that discipline has two aspects:

         1. the one referring to the whole government, inspection, training,
             guardianship and control which the church maintains over its
             members, its officers and its courts;
         2. the other a restricted and technical sense, signifying judicial
         process.

Therefore, the Constitution of the PCA requires elders, as a part of the
discipline of the church, to train its members in the ethical teachings of the
WLC, to inspect the members of the church in their adherence to ethical
behavior as taught by the WLC, and to govern, guard, and control the church
according to the ethical teachings of the WLC. When correction necessitates
judicial process, the subject matter of the WLC serves as the basis for
adjudication.3

   3
      BCO 29-1, “An offense, the proper object of judicial process, is anything in the
doctrines or practice of a Church member professing faith in Christ which is contrary
to the Word of God. The Confession of Faith and The Larger and Shorter Catechisms
of the Westminster Assembly, together with the formularies of government, discipline,
and worship are accepted by the Presbyterian Church in America as standard
                                         957
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



For these reasons, this report will ground its understanding of abuse in the
ethical teachings of the WLC found in its exposition of the Ten
Commandments.

While the technical terms describing abuse do not appear in The Westminster
Standards, the sinful behaviors that these terms describe do. All forms of abuse
described in this report are instances of “misuse,” but more specifically they
are misuses of power. This includes power that is (but is not limited to):

         ● Physical force that is used to strike, wound, or force someone to
              do something to which they do not consent;
         ● Authority that forces someone against their consent and wounds:
                  o    Formally recognized authority,
                  o    Familial authority, such as parents have over children,
                  o    Informal relational authority, such as exhibited by Sunday
                       School teachers or other workers who have charge over
                       children, and/or
                  o    Relational authority, such as that of respected members of
                       the church.

Misuse of power may also be exhibited in differences of age, in those who are
developmentally or intellectually more advanced, and/or in numbers or
financial influence.4

The Westminster Larger Catechism

The WLC lays out the sins of misuse of authority very clearly: aggravations
that make some sins more heinous than others, failure of superiors in their duty
towards inferiors, and sins of superiors against inferiors.5 These serve as the
theological basis for our understanding of abuse.


expositions of the teachings of Scripture in relation to both faith and practice. Nothing,
therefore, ought to be considered by any court as an offense, or admitted as a matter
of accusation, which cannot be proved to be such from Scripture,” (emphasis added).
    4
      Please see below under WLC 129, 130, and 151 for a fuller theological discussion.
    5
      For those that are unfamiliar with the Westminster Standards, the language of
superiors and inferiors may seem jarring. This is because in modern usage, these words
imply a value judgment of being of better or poorer in quality or worth. However, in
the 17th century the terms “inferior” and “superior” simply referred to a reference of
position. For example, the phrase, “the ground is inferior to the sky,” means simply
that the ground is lower than the sky. In modern American society further questions
may be raised by the implication of position or class among peoples. To this we must
                                           958
                                  APPENDIX V



In the analysis below we will state the catechism question and answer in full
and then work through pertinent clauses from the answer with the Scripture
verses cited by the Westminster Assembly. While we do not receive and adopt
the Scripture references as a part of our Constitution, we should give them due
consideration as they are the biblical basis that the Assembly adopted for what
they wrote. Some of the more pertinent Scripture citations will be printed in
full, but the reader is encouraged to keep Bible in hand in order to read all the
references.

WLC 151 on Aggravations That Make Sins More Heinous

The basic principle gleaned from this catechism answer is more heinous sins
cause more damage. Because heinous sins cause significant damage, they are
to be punished more severely, and victims are to be shown greater care. Many
instances are abusive due to the aggravating factors mentioned below. Abuse
is not merely one instance by a "hot head," nor is it excusable because of the
infrequency of the aggression. Apologizing does not negate abuse. Women do
not deserve to be abused because of their actions, wardrobe, or any other
factor. Aggravating factors such as power differentials, the presence of
covenant relationships, multiform sins, and repeated sins greatly magnify the
damage to a victim’s soul. Recognizing these factors is key to identifying and
responding well.

        Q. 151 What are those aggravations that make some sins more
        heinous than others?
        A. Sins receive their aggravations, 1. From the persons
        offending: if they be of riper age, greater experience or grace,
        eminent for profession, gifts, place, office, guides to others,
        and whose example is likely to be followed by others. 2. From
        the parties offended: if immediately against God, his attributes,
        and worship; against Christ, and his grace; the Holy Spirit, his
        witness, and workings; against superiors, men of eminency,
        and such as we stand especially related and engaged unto;
        against any of the saints, particularly weak brethren, the souls
        of them, or any other, and the common good of all or many. 3.
        From the nature and quality of the offence: if it be against the
        express letter of the law, break many commandments, contain
        in it many sins: if not only conceived in the heart, but breaks

understand that the Westminster Standards are not advocating for a societal class
system. Rather, this language is used to describe relationships of authority and
submission, a concept that is thoroughly biblical.
                                      959
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        forth in words and actions, scandalize others, and admit of no
        reparation: if against means, mercies, judgments, light of
        nature, conviction of consciousness, publick or private
        admonition, censures of the church, civil punishments; and our
        prayers, purposes, promises, vows, covenants, and engagements
        to God or men: if done deliberately, wilfully, presumptuously,
        impudently, boastingly, maliciously, frequently, obstinately,
        with delight, continuance, or relapsing after repentance. 4.
        From circumstances of time and place: if on the Lord's day, or
        other times of divine worship; or immediately before or after
        these, or other helps to prevent or remedy such miscarriages:
        if in publick, or in the presence of others, who are thereby
        likely to be provoked or defiled.

“From the persons offending: if they be of riper age, greater experience or
grace, eminent for profession, gifts, place, office, guides to others, and whose
example is likely to be followed by others.”

        (Scriptures cited: Jer. 2:8; Eccl. 4:13; 1 Kings 11:4, 9; 2 Sam. 12:14;
        1 Cor. 5:1; James 4:17; Luke 12:47-48; Jer. 5:4-5; 2 Sam. 12:7-9;
        Ezek. 8:11-12; Rom. 2:17-24; Gal. 2:11-14.)

The WLC and supporting Scripture show that the sins of those in authority are
more heinous, causing more damage and deserving of greater punishment
because of the position of authority. The confession supports the existence of
a differential of power in certain relationships. In each of the instances
mentioned, summarized as leadership status, age, and knowledge of the faith,
we find accompanying power over another. Power can be misused in order to
control, oppress, and harm others. When the misuse of power occurs, it may
be considered an abuse of authority.

Superiors are not necessarily official, ordained leaders of the church. Superiors
can be prominent members who are well-respected due to their knowledge or
faith practice. They can be Sunday school teachers, youth leaders, committee
chairpersons, or ministry team leaders. They can also be someone more
advanced in age. These power differentials should be considered in an abusive
situation. The harm done by leaders has a greater impact on the ones they harm.
A shepherd that takes advantage of his position to pillage his own flock is not
a shepherd (Ezek. 34).



                                      960
                                    APPENDIX V



“Particularly weak brethren, the souls of them”

         (Scriptures cited: 1 Cor. 8:11-12; Rom. 14:13, 15, 21; Ezek. 13:19
         Rev. 18:12-13; Matt. 23:15.)

The power differential is especially true of anyone who is weaker, but
especially those who are substantially helpless, such as children, those with
mental or physical disabilities, or those otherwise vulnerable due to their
condition. Peter also notes that women in marriages are the weaker vessel,
acknowledging the power dynamic between the sexes in general (1 Peter 3:7).
Peter’s declaration is interpreted as a statement about physical strength, the
vessel being a metaphor for the human body.6 Therefore husbands, and men in
general, are cautioned: men are, in general, physically stronger than women.
This power is provided to protect and serve their sisters in Christ, not to harm.

Some persons are vulnerable due to their position in relation to church power,
especially in access to church courts. Because the PCA ordains only men to
the office of presbyter, officers in the church must take special care to make
sure all laypeople, women in particular, have proper access and representation
in ecclesiastical courts. Church officers are instructed to ensure all parties in
judicial process have access to the rules of discipline and can obtain good
representation (BCO 32-3).

In Revelation 18:12-13, souls are equated to precious goods—valuable
individuals that ought to be treasured and kept safe. Abuse is a sin that damages
the soul. The Pauline passages cited above discuss the destruction of those for
whom Christ died. Modern scientific discoveries have shown us that abuse
trauma causes lasting damage to the psyche.7 The biblical word for psyche is


   6
      So, Matthew Henry, who says that, “she is the weaker vessel by nature and
constitution… but in other and higher respects equal to her husband,” in his
Commentary on the Whole Bible, 1 Peter 3:7. This interpretation is confirmed by other
NT uses of the term σκεῦος that more clearly refer to the human body (2 Cor. 4:7,
Rom. 9:22, 1 Thess. 4:4). John Calvin affirms this in his comments on 1 Thessalonians
4:4, “As for the expression, that every one of you may know to possess his vessel,
some explain it as referring to a wife, as though it had been said, ‘Let husbands dwell
with their wives in all chastity.’ As, however, he addresses husbands and wives
indiscriminately, there can be no doubt that he employs the term vessel to mean body,”
John Calvin, Commentaries on The Epistle of Paul to the Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians.
    7
      H. D. Gingrich and F. C. Gingrich. Treating Trauma in Christian Counseling
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2017), 55-77.
                                         961
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



soul. This confessional clause, “the souls of them,” with its accompanying
Scripture citations, therefore, gives the theological basis for abuse-related
trauma and speaks to the evil nature of causing damage to another image-
bearer’s soul.8

“Break many commandments, contain in it many sins”

        (Scriptures cited: Col. 3:5; 1 Tim. 6:10; Prov. 5:8-12; 6:32-33; Josh.
        7:21.)

The damage of abuse is the result when multiple sins are committed. When a
person verbally abuses, they are transgressing the sixth and ninth
commandments. If it is a husband of a wife, the fifth and seventh
commandments are transgressed as well. All abuse involves deception (a
violation of the ninth commandment): the abuser’s self-deceit, the deception
of the victim, and the deception of the community. The sin of abuse is deemed
more heinous because of this multiplicity of transgressions.

“Promises, vows, covenants, and engagements to God or men”

        (Scriptures cited: Ps. 78:34-37; Jer. 2:20; Jer. 42:5-6, 20-21; Eccl. 5:4-
        6; Prov. 20:25; Lev. 26:25; Prov. 2:17; Ezek. 17:18-19.)

The WLC considers sin that transgresses vows and promises as base. This
includes spouses who make vows to one another, parents who make vows to
their children, church officers who make vows to the flock, and congregations
who make vows to their pastors, elders, and deacons. Whenever these vows
and promises are broken, it causes great damage. Thus, when a parent abuses
a child, great damage is done due to not only the transgression of so many
commandments, but also due to the breach of the covenant bond between them.
When a husband abuses his wife, great damage is done. When a pastor or elder,
who swore to feed the sheep for whom Christ died, abuses his own sheep, it is
grievous. This is why Jesus says it would be better to have a great millstone
hung around their necks and be thrown into the depths of the sea (Matt. 18:6,

   8
      While the Bible does not use the terms “psychological damage” or “trauma,” it
does refer to the damage of souls. The Greek word ψυχή is the word used in the Bible
for “soul.” This word also serves as the etymological root for the word “psychology.”
Revelation 18:12-13 shows that the soul has great value, the implication being that
great care should be taken not to damage souls. Further, Proverbs 14:30 and Habakkuk
3:16 speak of “bone rot” and Psalm 31:10 speaks of “bones wasting away.” These
three references seem to be metaphors for harm being done to the soul.
                                        962
                                     APPENDIX V



Mark 9:42, Luke 17:2). The implication is that the dread Judge of all will have
His vengeance (Rom. 12:19).
“If done . . . frequently, [or] with . . . continuance”

          (Scriptures cited: Num. 14:22; Isa. 57:17.)

Non-physical forms of abuse are established by the evidence of a pattern of
sinful behavior. The catechism validates this framework with the statement
that sins committed frequently or with continuance are more heinous.

“Relapsing after repentance”

          (Scriptures cited: Jer. 34:8-11; 2 Peter 2:20-22.)

One of the factors for judging if repentance is genuine, and if restoration of an
abuser is warranted, is when they demonstrate fruits in keeping with
repentance. Paul writes,

          For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation
          without regret, whereas worldly grief produces death. For see
          what earnestness this godly grief has produced in you, but also
          what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what
          fear, what longing, what zeal, what punishment! At every point
          you have proved yourselves innocent in the matter (2 Cor.
          7:10-11).9

Apologizing is certainly expected when a sin is committed against another.
However, simply stating “I’m sorry” is inadequate considering the substance
found in Paul’s letter. Is the abuser earnest for God to produce a grief in them
that is eager to deal with their sin? Are they grieving how they’ve sinned
against God (primarily) and their fellow image-bearer (specifically)? Do they
recognize the full impact of their sin on the victim? Are they submitting to the
process of repentance? What does restitution look like, and do they desire to
do whatever it takes to make the wrong right?

Or, conversely, is the abuser experiencing worldly sorrow? Do they regret their
actions, but grieve simply the consequences? Are they upset about what they
did or that they got caught? Repentance is a work of the Holy Spirit. A person
who diligently deals with their sin positions themselves humbly before their


   9
       See Attachment 10: Repentance for an extended exegesis of this passage.
                                         963
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Lord and pleads for Him to work restoration—restoration to a right
relationship with Him. Discerning repentance is difficult especially when the
presenting sin involves manipulation and deception, which are key features of
a heart that oppresses.10

The WLC on the Ten Commandments

Having discussed the aggravating factors that cause sins to become more
heinous, we now move to the Catechism content of the Ten Commandments.
While the transgression of any commandment is grievous, the locus of our
analysis will be focused on the fifth, sixth, seventh, and ninth commandments
as they relate particularly to abuse.

The Fifth Commandment

“Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God giveth thee” (Ex. 20:12).

        Q. 129 What is required of superiors towards their inferiors?
        A. It is required of superiors according to that power they
        receive from God, and that relation wherein they stand, to love,
        pray for, and bless their inferiors, to instruct, counsel, and
        admonish them; countenancing, commending, and rewarding
        such as do well; and discountenancing, reproving, and
        chastising such as do ill; protecting, and providing for them all
        things necessary for soul and body: and by grave, wise, holy,
        and exemplary carriage, to procure glory to God, honour to
        themselves, and so to preserve that authority which God hath
        put upon them.

Authority, according to the catechism answer, is the power a “superior”
receives from God. God gifts that power to benefit those under authority. This
includes (but is not limited to) loving, blessing, praying for, instructing,
counseling, and admonishing. Those with positions of authority reward and
commend those under their care when they do right, as well as discountenance,
reprove, and chastise when they do wrong. Superiors are also to protect and
provide for all things necessary for soul and body. In accomplishing these
goals, those in authority procure glory for God and preserve the authority God

   10
      See Attachment 10 on Repentance. Also see this resource to help you discern if
what you are seeing is godly repentance. https://www.ccef.org/jbc_article/how-to-
discern-true-repentance-when-serious-sin-has-occurred/
                                        964
                                     APPENDIX V



gives. Practically, the catechism states this is applied through instruction,
counsel, protection, and provision.
As this relates to abuse, it is the duty of the elders to instruct and counsel their
congregations according to God’s Word (Deut. 6:6-7), the confessional
standards, and common grace informed resources. Superiors thereby provide
members with the tools necessary to care for one another. Learning what the
Bible teaches regarding abuse and those who abuse, helps create a culture in
the church that quickly identifies and thereby prevents sinful abusive
behaviors.

It is also the duty of elders to protect and provide. Churches protect their
members with policies that take into consideration the most vulnerable in the
congregation.11 Leaders —to the best of their ability—provide both children
and adults, every age group and gender, with the tools necessary for abuse
prevention.

Two areas in the catechism answer address response to abuse:

    •    The duty to deal with those who sin. The catechism states church
         leaders are to “discountenance.” “Discountenance” is defined as to
         “discourage by evidence of disapproval.”12 This evidence is not only
         exhibited toward the offender, but also witnessed by any victims and
         the church-at-large. To discountenance is to “call out and thwart”
         those who do wrong. Calling out the evildoer helps prevent the evil
         from continuing. It also acts as a deterrent, warning others who might
         do similarly. Discretion and wisdom are necessary in doing this, as
         instructed in the BCO and in Holy Scripture (BCO 32-1, Gal. 6:1). Yet
         elders should not shy away from the duty of discountenancing the evil
         of abuse in our midst out of the desire to protect reputations. The
         catechism directly charges us to discountenance such evil.
    •    The charge for elders to “reprove and chastise.” This speaks directly
         to the infliction of censures as found in BCO 36. Note, according to

    11
       Examples might be Presbyteries and Sessions enacting policies to hire qualified
independent parties to investigate claims of abuse, policies detailing appropriate
workplace interactions to inform and protect against harassment, Presbyteries enacting
policies to require background checks and abuse training for all ordinands and
transfers, and policies to protect whistleblowers against retribution. The basic idea is
that the job of prevention is not completed once a Sunday morning child protection
policy has been adopted.
    12
       Webster.com Dictionary, s.v. “discountenance,”
    https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/discountenance.
                                          965
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         the BCO, censures may be inflicted on those who are repentant (BCO
         38-1). Indeed, when a great evil has occurred, it is the duty of the
         courts of the church to inflict censures in order to operate as a means
         to reclaim the offender, deliver the church from scandal, and inspire
         fear by example (BCO 30-4). Discretion and wisdom are necessary in
         making censures known. Protecting any victims is the primary
         concern.

The second duty of superiors is to provide for those under their authority. This
instructs parents to provide for their children. To fail to provide for a child’s
needs is child neglect. This neglect can also manifest as spousal neglect and/or
economic abuse. The standard in the catechism is the duty of familial superiors
to provide for the needs of those under their care. Since the catechism notes
that provision includes “all things necessary for soul and body,” spiritual harm
by the misuse of power falls under this clause.

The final duty of superiors is to bless inferiors. As it relates to abuse, lack of
properly responding to evil when it happens is a failure to bless the vulnerable.
Lack of response, and/or a poor response, may lead to spiritual disillusionment
and perhaps the inferior departing from the church.13

Scripture References for WLC 129

The Scripture references of the WLC are a valuable tool to understand the
biblical basis of the sin of abuse and further elucidate the thinking of the
divines. Below are some of the relevant Scriptures.

The Confessional Definition of Abuse

    ●    Colossians 3:19 ‒ Husbands, love your wives, and do not be
         harsh with them.


    13
       One example of this is a Pew Research study on the religious “nones” that stated,
“One-in-five express an opposition to organized religion in general. This share
includes some who do not like the hierarchical nature of religious groups, several
people who think religion is too much like a business and others who mention clergy
sexual abuse scandals as reasons for their stance.” https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2016/08/24/why-americas-nones-left-religion-behind/. See also this article from
The Gospel Coalition, that cites “church hurt” as a reason why many young
evangelicals are deconstructing: https://www.thegospelcoalition.org/article/4-causes-
deconstruction/.
                                          966
                                    APPENDIX V



    ●    Ephesians 6:4 ‒ Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger,
         but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
    ●    1 Peter 3:7 ‒ Likewise, husbands, live with your wives in an
         understanding way, showing honor to the woman as the
         weaker vessel, since they are heirs with you of the grace of life,
         so that your prayers may not be hindered.

These verses describe behaviors of harshness, provocation, and insensitivity
through words and/or actions as sinful behaviors in various relationships
(husband to wives, parents to children). All relationships struggle with these
sins. What makes the sinful behavior abusive is that it is a repeated, persistent
pattern of sin over a prolonged period that causes significant and lasting
damage. This report understands non-physical forms of abuse in this way. An
individual who perpetrates repeated, persistent sins of abuse must not be
dismissed as someone who “sometimes loses his cool.” All forms of abuse,
whether physical or non-physical, negatively impact both the inner and outer
man.

The Requirement To Report Abuse to the Civil Authorities

    ●    1 Peter 2:14 ‒ or to governors as sent by him to punish those
         who do evil and to praise those who do good.
    ●    Romans 13:4 ‒ for he is God's servant for your good. But if
         you do wrong, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain.
         For he is the servant of God, an avenger who carries out God's
         wrath on the wrongdoer.

These verses instruct how to deal appropriately with the evil of abuse when it
occurs. “Governors” exist in both the state and the church. When it comes to
criminal abuse, the governors of the church should submit to the laws and
authority of the state (Rom. 13:1-7). When it comes to forms of abuse that the
state does not criminalize or does not hold criminally liable, it remains the duty
of church governors to discountenance those sins.14

Oppression as the Biblical Category for Abuse



   14
      It should also be noted that many times the civil authorities will decline to
investigate a matter or prosecute the perpetrator. This is not a statement of innocence
by the magistrate and thus does not necessarily remove the responsibility of the church
courts to deal with sin.
                                         967
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●   Job 29:12-17 ‒ . . . because I delivered the poor who cried for help,
        and the fatherless who had none to help him. The blessing of him who
        was about to perish came upon me, and I caused the widow's heart to
        sing for joy. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; my justice was
        like a robe and a turban. I was eyes to the blind and feet to the lame. I
        was a father to the needy, and I searched out the cause of him whom I
        did not know. I broke the fangs of the unrighteous and made him drop
        his prey from his teeth.
    ●   Isaiah 1:17 ‒ “Learn to do good; seek justice, correct oppression; bring
        justice to the fatherless, plead the widow's cause.”

These verses speak generally to the duty of leaders to seek justice and correct
oppression. They also direct leaders to pay particular attention to those who
have less power. We are to plead the widow’s cause because she has no one to
help her. In dealing with abuse, the Scriptures call us to carefully attend to
those in the situation who have less power.

Protecting the Reputation of Church Leaders

    ●   1 Timothy 4:12 ‒ Let no one despise you for your youth, but set the
        believers an example in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity.
    ●   Titus 2:3-5 ‒ Older women likewise are to be reverent in behavior, not
        slanderers or slaves to much wine. They are to teach what is good, and
        so train the young women to love their husbands and children, to be
        self-controlled, pure, working at home, kind, and submissive to their
        own husbands, that the word of God may not be reviled. (Emphasis
        added.)
    ●   1 Kings 3:28 ‒ And all Israel heard of the judgment that the king had
        rendered, and they stood in awe of the king, because they perceived
        that the wisdom of God was in him to do justice.
    ●   Titus 2:15 ‒ Declare these things; exhort and rebuke with all authority.
        Let no one disregard you.

These verses speak to the duty of superiors to accrue glory to God and preserve
their reputations by doing what is right. One of the qualifications for an elder
is to be thought well of by outsiders (1 Tim. 3:7). If outsiders lack respect for
the church due to its failures in both preventing and adequately responding to
abuse, leaders are those primarily responsible to seek the ways in which the
church has failed to obey God (Amos 3:2; 1 Peter 4:17).



                                      968
                                   APPENDIX V



The Sins Forbidden in the Fifth Commandment

        Q. 130 What are the sins of superiors?
        A. The sins of superiors are, besides the neglect of the duties
        required of them, an inordinate seeking of themselves, their
        own glory, ease, profit, or pleasure, commanding things
        unlawful, or not in the power of inferiors to perform;
        counselling, encouraging, or favouring them in that which is
        evil; dissuading, discouraging, or discountenancing them in
        that which is good; correcting them unduly; careless exposing,
        or leaving them to wrong, temptation, and danger; provoking
        them to wrath; or any way dishonouring themselves, or
        lessening their authority, by an unjust, indiscreet, rigorous, or
        remiss behaviour.
In this question and answer, one instance of these sins may not constitute
abuse. It is the repeated persistent pattern of sin over a prolonged period that
causes significant and lasting harm.

“An inordinate seeking of themselves, their own glory, ease, profit, or
pleasure.”
    ●   Ezekiel 34:2-4 ‒ “Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds
        of Israel; prophesy, and say to them, even to the shepherds,
        Thus says the Lord GOD: Ah, shepherds of Israel who have
        been feeding yourselves! Should not shepherds feed the sheep?
        You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, you
        slaughter the fat ones, but you do not feed the sheep. The weak
        you have not strengthened, the sick you have not healed, the
        injured you have not bound up, the strayed you have not
        brought back, the lost you have not sought, and with force and
        harshness you have ruled them.”
    ●   Philippians 2:21 ‒ For they all seek their own interests, not
        those of Jesus Christ.

The sin of “seeking of themselves,” as mentioned in this first phrase, may lead
to an incessant pattern of demand, minimization, humiliation, blame-shifting,
coercion, denial, threats, and/or treating a person like a servant. Sometimes,
this may also include stringent limits on access to financial resources. If the
self-centeredness of a husband, parent, or caregiver leads to the harm of the
family due to its severity and prolonged persistence, then it could be abuse.
This is especially true when it leads to the family’s physical or spiritual neglect.


                                        969
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



“Commanding things unlawful, or not in the power of inferiors to perform;
counselling [or] encouraging them in that which is evil.”15

        (Scriptures cited: Dan. 3:4-6; Acts 4:17; Ex. 5:10-18; Matt. 23:4; Matt
        14:8; 2 Sam. 13:28.)

This phrase speaks of when an authority figure asks or commands those under
their charge to do something illegal or immoral. Church leaders are responsible
to know what constitutes illegal behavior in their community, when, how, and
to whom to report a crime, and public resources available to both victims and
abusers. This is in addition to wise shepherding care, which has a broad,
biblical understanding of what constitutes immorality in the body of Christ.
Doctrines of suffering, submission, headship, gossip, slander, and intimacy in
marriage, are all relevant to helping congregants respond well to the sins of
abuse. It is a grievous sin when an authority figure uses his or her authority
(by force or coercion) to secure participation in sinful acts. Related to this,
there is an erroneous teaching that submission owed to the husband/father is
such that wives and children must submit even if he commands something
sinful. It has also been taught that a wife or a child cannot report the
husband/father’s (or mother’s if applicable) moral failures to the authorities
(church or civil). These are false teachings that must be suppressed.

Further, when a superior “ties up heavy burdens, hard to bear,” through
impossible demands and exacting punishments, great soul damage can be
done, and thus can be a factor in spiritual abuse or leadership abuse.16

“Favouring them in that which is evil”

    ●   1 Samuel 3:13 ‒ “And I declare to him that I am about to punish
        his house forever, for the iniquity that he knew, because his sons
        were blaspheming God, and he did not restrain them.”

The Scripture reference for “favoring them in that which is evil,” is Eli’s
inaction in disciplining his sons. Passive forbearance with his sons’ great evil
is what led to Israel’s downfall. We must not forebear with abusers in the
church. This is a sinful favoring of evil. Leaders should instead restrain evil by
thoroughly educating themselves and their congregations regarding the

   15
      “Favoring” is removed from this section in order to deal with it separately
below.
   16
      See Attachment 1: Definitions for meanings of these terms and Section Six:
Misuse of Spiritual Authority in this report.
                                        970
                                  APPENDIX V



dynamics of abuse, carefully constructing robust policies to prevent abuse, and
responding adequately when it occurs.

“Dissuading, discouraging, or discountenancing them in that which is good;
correcting them unduly”

        (Scriptures cited: John 7:46-49; Col. 3:21; Ex. 5:17; 1 Peter 2:18-20;
        Heb. 12:10; Deut. 25:3.)
When leaders, either in the home, workplace, or church, berate or belittle those
under their care, it diminishes the image of God in man. The body and the
mind, heart, will, and emotions are all a reflection of God’s image.

Diminishing others is how abusive people manipulate to control. It is an
insidious tactic that causes significant (psychological) damage to the inner
man. Similarly, an act of discipline or correction that is not reciprocal to the
wrong committed can also be weaponized by an abuser. Patterns of devaluing
God’s image in another over a prolonged period of time results in a victim’s
inability to reason appropriately, make wise personal decisions, and/or mediate
reality. Ultimately, it diminishes their capacity to steward their God-given gifts
and glorify their Creator.

“Careless exposing, or leaving them to wrong, temptation, and danger”

    ●   Genesis 38:11 ‒ Then Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law,
        “Remain a widow in your father's house, till Shelah my son
        grows up” for he feared that he would die, like his brothers. So
        Tamar went and remained in her father's house.
    ●   Genesis 38:26 ‒ Then Judah identified them and said, “She is
        more righteous than I, since I did not give her to my son Shelah.”
        And he did not know her again.
    ●   Acts 18:17 ‒ And they all seized Sosthenes, the ruler of the
        synagogue, and beat him in front of the tribunal. But Gallio paid
        no attention to any of this.

Exposing children to danger is undeniably abuse and neglect. One instance is
sufficient for identifying exposure as abuse, especially when physical harm is
involved. Even when there is no physical harm, exposure is sinful. Exposure
disrupts the bond of trust between children and their parents and causes lasting
damage. “Adverse Child Experiences” or the ACE study, meticulously
identified multiple and long-lasting effects of not only physical harm and


                                       971
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



exposure, but also of the more overt forms of physical and sexual abuse.17
Exposure occurs also when children live in a home where substance abuse or
other dangerous and sinful behavior occur. ACEs demonstrated lasting
damage to a child’s developing brain, especially in how that person responds
to certain stimuli and social interactions. These experiences can lead to PTSD
similar to the severity soldiers experience on a battlefield.

Included in these sins of exposure is when authorities, whether civil or
ecclesiastical, require abuse victims to stay in abusive relationships. Requiring
an abused wife to reconcile with her unrepentant abuser, return to the marriage
home and bed, is careless exposing to danger. The abuser’s genuine repentance
must be observed, confirmed, and proven through the test of time [see
Attachment 10: Repentance]. It involves more than (but is not limited to)
admitting to being caught, saying “I’m sorry,” and/or pledging to work with
the Session.

Similarly, forcing children to reconcile relationally with abusive parents may
cause great harm. Care, discernment, and wisdom must be taken in these
situations.

The rules of discipline are inappropriate tools for forcing compliance of abuse
victims.

Careless exposure to wrong and danger also occurs when authorities in the
church fail to properly educate the congregation on issues of abuse and
institute appropriate policies for abuse prevention.

As pointed out above in the discussion of Question 129, many people are
leaving the church due, in part, to the way the church has responded to abuse.
When anyone abandons the bride of Christ for an unbiblical reason, it is sinful.
However, if authorities expose “them to temptation,” the greater sin lies with
leaders. Judah said in Genesis 38:26, “She is more righteous than I.” Jesus
likewise said, “But whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me
to sin, it would be better for him to have a great millstone fastened around his
neck and to be drowned in the depth of the sea” (Matt. 18:6).

“Provoking them to wrath”



    17
       For a helpful description of adverse child experiences, see: https://www.cdc.gov
/violence prevention/aces/index.html
                                          972
                                 APPENDIX V



    ●   Ephesians 6:4 ‒ Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger,
        but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.

Superiors in the family may provoke those under their care by many of the
aforementioned WLC prohibitions. They might apply exacting punishments,
diminish and belittle, have unrealistic expectations, favor their own desires to
the exclusion of everyone else in the family, and/or expose them to dangerous
situations. When little ones under the authority of others have been caused to
sin, far greater sin has been done by those that have provoked them by their
abuse. Shepherds care for victims with kindness while simultaneously (justly)
punishing abusers.
This principle applies to other “superior-inferior” type relationships as well.
Abuse victims are not without sin. However, there is a significant inequality
between their sin issues and the evil of abuse. Wrath is an appropriate response
to evil. Victims must not sin in their response to the abuse, yet it is within
reason that they are very angry about the sins committed against them. This
doesn’t excuse sin. It does mean church leaders and members should patiently
shepherd the victim with care and understanding, and to never equate their
anger with the sins of their abusers.

“Or any way dishonouring themselves, or lessening their authority, by an
unjust, indiscreet, rigorous, or remiss behaviour”

    ●   Genesis 9:21 – He drank of the wine and became drunk and lay
        uncovered in his tent.
    ●   1 Kings 12:13-16 ‒ And the king answered the people harshly,
        and forsaking the counsel that the old men had given him, he
        spoke to them according to the counsel of the young men, saying,
        “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke.
        My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you
        with scorpions.” So the king did not listen to the people, for it
        was a turn of affairs brought about by the LORD that he might
        fulfill his word, which the LORD spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite
        to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. And when all Israel saw that the
        king did not listen to them, the people answered the king, “What
        portion do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son
        of Jesse. To your tents, O Israel! Look now to your own house,
        David.” So Israel went to their tents.
    ●   1 Kings 1:6 ‒ His father had never at any time displeased him by
        asking, “Why have you done thus and so?” He was also a very
        handsome man, and he was born next after Absalom.
                                      973
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●   1 Samuel 2:29-31 ‒ “Why then do you scorn My sacrifices and
        My offerings that I commanded for My dwelling, and honor your
        sons above Me by fattening yourselves on the choicest parts of
        every offering of my people Israel?” Therefore the LORD, the
        God of Israel, declares: “I promised that your house and the
        house of your father should go in and out before Me forever,”
        but now the LORD declares: “Far be it from Me, for those who
        honor Me I will honor, and those who despise Me shall be lightly
        esteemed. Behold, the days are coming when I will cut off your
        strength and the strength of your father's house, so that there will
        not be an old man in your house.”

When leaders, whether in the home, workplace, church, or civil government,
dishonor themselves through sinful behavior, harsh discipline, or lax
discipline, they bring dishonor on themselves and to God. Leaders in the
church should not be surprised when sheep chafe under such authority. When
those under authority are provoked to wrath, or otherwise begin to reject
authority because of the leader's sin, the greater fault lies with the leader. The
charge from the people of Israel is poignant, “Look now to your own house,
David!” Church leaders must first see to their own duties before bemoaning
and laying blame on those who are leaving the church and speaking derisively
of her. The examples of Eli and his sons, David and his sons, and Solomon in
his later reign are poignant. As the Lord promised Samuel, He will judge
church leaders for such behavior (1 Peter 4:17). The duty of those in authority
is to right the ship.

The Sixth Commandment

You shall not murder (Ex. 20:13).

The locus of many sinful behaviors falling under the heading of abuse is found
in the sixth commandment. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus expands the
scope of the commandment from the unjust taking of life, to the inner working
of our hearts and to the realm of speech.

        You have heard that it was said to those of old, you shall not
        murder; and whoever murders will be liable to judgment. But I
        say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be
        liable to judgment; whoever insults his brother will be liable to
        the council; and whoever says, you fool! will be liable to the hell
        of fire (Matt. 5:21-22).
                                       974
                                   APPENDIX V




The Divines follow in this vein to expound upon the sixth commandment in
all its facets:

        Q. 135 What are the duties required in the sixth commandment?
        A. The duties required in the sixth commandment are, all careful
        studies, and lawful endeavours, to preserve the life of ourselves
        and others by resisting all thoughts and purposes, subduing all
        passions, and avoiding all occasions, temptations, and practices,
        which tend to the unjust taking away the life of any; by just
        defence thereof against violence, patient bearing of the hand of
        God, quietness of mind, cheerfulness of spirit; a sober use of
        meat, drink, physick, sleep, labour, and recreations; by charitable
        thoughts, love, compassion, meekness, gentleness, kindness;
        peaceable, mild and courteous speeches and behaviour;
        forbearance, readiness to be reconciled, patient bearing and
        forgiving of injuries, and requiting good for evil; comforting and
        succouring the distressed, and protecting and defending the
        innocent.

There is some repetition between WLC 135 and 136, thus the overt actions that
are related to abuse will be covered below. However, there are several relevant
matters in the answer, especially as it relates to the positive duty to preserve
life and protect those under threat.

“To preserve the life of ourselves and others . . . by just defense thereof against
violence”

    ●   1 Kings 18:4 ‒ And when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the
        LORD, Obadiah took a hundred prophets and hid them by fifties
        in a cave and fed them with bread and water.
    ●   Psalm 82:4 ‒ Rescue the weak and the needy; deliver them from
        the hand of the wicked.
    ●   Proverbs 24:11-12 ‒ Rescue those who are being taken away to
        death; hold back those who are stumbling to the slaughter. If you
        say, “Behold, we did not know this,” does not He who weighs
        the heart perceive it? Does not He who keeps watch over your
        soul know it, and will He not repay man according to his work?

        (Additional Scriptures cited: Eph. 5:28-29; 1 Sam. 14:45; Jer. 38:7-
        13.)
                                       975
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




Scripture is clear that preserving life includes defending victims of abuse. The
first duty is to preserve our own lives. This speaks to the obligation victims
have to protect themselves from an abuser. This may include removing herself
and her children from an abusive home, resisting living with a spouse that a
church court acknowledged has been abusive, and separating as a matter of
protection, even as others urge reconciliation with the abuser. This is the duty
to preserve life.

The second duty falls under preserving the life of others. This type of
preservation removes the victim, and any other potential victims, from the
immediate vicinity of the abuser. Any avenue that the abuser uses to further
abuse must be removed. The sixth commandment duty also includes fulfilling
the Romans 13 obligation to inform the civil authorities when the situation
requires mandated reporting (See Section Five: Child Abuse).

“Patient bearing of the hand of God”

          (Scriptures cited: James 5:7-11; Heb. 12:9.)

This duty speaks to the nature of repentance. Genuine repentance patiently
bears with the consequences of one’s sin. A truly repentant abuser will
recognize the gravity of his or her sin and not force the process of
reconciliation. Rather, those truly repentant will wait patiently until the abused
are ready for relational restoration.18

Abusive church leaders should patiently bear under the hand of God and not
rush to be restored to a position of leadership. Damage done by abuse can be
severe and long lasting. Protecting survivors means continuous safeguarding
throughout the recovery process.

“Forbearance, readiness to be reconciled, patient bearing and forgiving of
injuries, and requiting good for evil”

          (Scriptures cited: Matt. 5:24; Eph. 4:2; Eph. 4:32; Rom. 12:17; Rom.
          12:20; Rom. 12:21.)

Because preserving life implies patience with victims, impartiality requires a
careful examination of this seemingly opposite clause. In order to understand


   18
        See Attachment 9: Forgiveness and Attachment 10: Repentance.
                                        976
                                  APPENDIX V



how these duties work together, a biblical understanding of reconciliation and
forbearance is needed. Forgiveness is not reconciliation, and forbearance is not
antithetical to preservation.

Forgiveness

These passages show that believers must forgive one another. Forgiveness is
required by the gospel. However, the duty to preserve life requires protecting
victims from their abuser. It also requires protecting those who choose to
remain with their abuser. Protection includes trying to persuade a victim to
move to safety.

Forgiveness does not always involve relational restoration.19 When it comes to
reconciliation and forgiveness, this must be also measured against the duty to
protect. The duty that follows below states, “comfort and succor the
distressed.” If the abused person is distressed, leaders are called to continue
protecting them while they seek healing.

The catechism answer requires, “requiting good for evil.” Insisting on
accountability, justice, and rehabilitation may be the cause of an abuser truly
repenting of his or her sins and receiving eternal reward. What greater good
can be requited than salvation?

Forbearance

The duty of forbearance does not negate the duty to preserve one’s life from
violence. The duty to preserve is primary and supersedes the duty of
forbearance. The Scripture reference for forbearance is Ephesians 4:2,
“bearing with one another in love,” and the Greek word is ἀνέχω. This word
is defined as “endurance.” The context of Ephesians 4 is not intimate
relationships but the unity of the church body. Paul is asking believers to be
patient with one another’s shortcomings in order to preserve unity and peace
in the church. He is not asking abuse victims to endure further abuse. “One
another” is plural, implying not an endurance between two persons but an
endurance between one person and the larger community. Paul is clear in his
writings that patient endurance does not mean allowing grave sins to persist,
saying, “purge the evil person from among you,”20 and, “I have handed [them]
over to Satan.”21 Moreover, the citation for Romans 12 states “repay no one

   19
      See Attachment 9: Forgiveness.
   20
      1 Corinthians 5:5.
   21
      1 Timothy 1:20.
                                       977
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



evil for evil.” Moving victims out of abusive situations is not repaying evil for
evil but protecting from further harm. Abuse is a grave sin against the image-
bearer of God. Biblical forbearance does not include remaining in abusive
situations.

Nevertheless, adults should not be moved into protective situations against
their will unless there is a grave threat of the loss of life.

“Comforting and succouring the distressed, and protecting and defending the
innocent.”

    ●   Matthew 25:35-36 ‒ “For I was hungry and you gave Me food, I
        was thirsty and you gave Me drink, I was a stranger and you
        welcomed Me, I was naked and you clothed Me, I was sick and
        you visited Me, I was in prison and you came to Me.”
    ●   Proverbs 31:8-9 ‒ Open your mouth for the mute, for the rights
        of all who are destitute. Open your mouth, judge righteously,
        defend the rights of the poor and needy.

        (Additional Scriptures cited: 1 Thess. 5:14; Job 31:19-20; Isa.
        58:7.)

To give comfort and succor to those distressed by abuse is to protect. This
includes the provision of qualified medical care for both the wounds of the
body and the wounds of the mind. According to our own Reformed
distinctives, man consists of two parts: a body and a soul.22 Though delineated
into two, the inner and outer “designate the one spiritual substance of man . . .
(Rom. 8:10; 1 Cor. 5:5; 7:34; 2 Cor. 7:1; Eph. 2:3; Col. 2:5).”23 Both body and
soul constitute the whole man, therefore when someone experiences abuse, the
whole man is in need of care. The human mind is a mysterious example of this.
What we call the mind can in some ways be attributed to the soul. However,
we also know that the mind has a physical component.24

For many forms of abuse, including child abuse, sexual abuse, physical assault,
sexual assault, and any other abuse that causes severe psychological distress,


   22
      See WLC Q. 29 and Q. 37 and Matt. 6:25; 10:28; Eccl. 12:7; and 1 Cor 5:3, 5.
   23
        L. Berkhof. Manual of Christian Doctrine (Grand Rapids, MI: WM. B.
Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1933), 121-123.
   24
      See Matthew 22:37 where Jesus substitutes mind for might, “Love the Lord your
God with all your heart and with your soul and with your mind.”
                                       978
                                     APPENDIX V



damage to the brain and central nervous system is significant.25 This damage
can manifest itself as PTSD, OCD, depression, anxiety, and a variety of other
disorders. Shepherds are called to care for the soul; however, wisdom directs
church leaders to partner with trained individuals with experience working
with these conditions for the purpose of comprehensive caregiving.26
Financial provision for counseling and medical treatment is considered an
appropriate restitution from the abuser to the abused (see Exodus 22). It can
also be an act of mercy for the church to assist victims with the cost of their
care. Due to privacy issues as it relates to medical and mental healthcare,
consider hiring a third-party administrator to handle reimbursements. Due to
the intimate nature of the care, the choice of a counselor belongs to the victim.
Stipulations should not be placed on the usage of funds by those granting.

The Sins Forbidden in the Sixth Commandment

The sixth commandment contains overtly sinful behaviors that can be abusive.

         Q. 136 What are the sins forbidden in the sixth commandment?
         A. The sins forbidden in the sixth commandment are, all taking away
         the life of ourselves, or of others, except in case of publick justice,
         lawful war, or necessary defence; the neglecting or withdrawing the
         lawful and necessary means of preservation of life; sinful anger,
         hatred, envy, desire of revenge; all excessive passions, distracting
         cares; immoderate use of meat, drink, labour, and recreations;
         provoking words, oppression, quarrelling, striking, wounding, and
         whatsoever else tends to the destruction of the life of any.

“All taking away the life of ourselves, or of others”

    ●    Acts 16:28 ‒ But Paul cried with a loud voice, “Do not harm
         yourself, for we are all here.”


    25
       H. D. Gingrich and F. C. Gingrich. Treating Trauma in Christian Counseling
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2017), 67.
    26
       Does a psychologist need to be a Reformed Christian in order to partner in
providing care for victims? While the issue is complex, the short answer is no.
Certainly, treatment providers who are not antagonistic to Reformed beliefs, or seek
to undermine them, can be engaged. A non-Christian provider can work with a
patient’s religious beliefs and still care for them well. The key factor in identifying a
treatment provider is that the person is qualified to treat disorders related to abuse
trauma.
                                          979
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●   Genesis 9:6 ‒ “Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall
        his blood be shed, for God made man in His own image.”

The foundational principle found in this commandment is that all abuse is a
taking away of life. This is why abuse is so damaging. Genesis 9:6 states that
the severity of the sin is due to the fact that great damage has been done to an
image-bearer of God. Since all human beings are made in God’s image, any
attempt to take away life is a grave sin with grave consequences.

“Withdrawing the lawful and necessary means of preservation of life”

    ●   Matthew 25:42-43 ‒ “For I was hungry and you gave Me no
        food, I was thirsty and you gave Me no drink, I was a stranger
        and you did not welcome Me, naked and you did not clothe
        Me, sick and in prison and you did not visit Me.”
    ●   James 2:15-16 ‒ If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and
        lacking in daily food, and one of you says to them, “Go in
        peace, be warmed and filled,” without giving them the things
        needed for the body, what good is that?

As seen in the duties of the fifth commandment, the sin of neglect is a form of
abuse. Here, in the sixth commandment, the sin of neglect is the taking away
of the necessary means for life. The sin of neglect applies to those in authority,
but it also applies generally to all human beings. However, only those who
have immediate responsibility for the one who is suffering are accountable.

Churches have the duty to care and provide for those who have need due to
abuse. If such persons need food, clothing, and shelter because they have fled
for their own safety, the church should attempt to provide. This seems to be
the very least that the Scriptures cited above require.

“Sinful anger, hatred, envy, desire of revenge; all excessive passions”

    ●   Matthew 5:22 ‒ “But I say to you that everyone who is angry
        with his brother will be liable to judgment; whoever insults his
        brother will be liable to the council; and whoever says, ‘You
        fool!’ will be liable to the hell of fire.”
    ●   1 John 3:15 ‒ Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer,
        and you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.



                                       980
                                   APPENDIX V



    ●   Leviticus 19:17 ‒ You shall not hate your brother in your heart,
        but you shall reason frankly with your neighbor, lest you incur
        sin because of him.
    ●   Proverbs 14:30 ‒ A tranquil heart gives life to the flesh, but
        envy makes the bones rot.
    ●   Romans 12:19 ‒ Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave
        it to the wrath of God, for it is written, “Vengeance is Mine, I
        will repay,” says the Lord.
    ●   Ephesians 4:31 ‒ Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and
        clamor and slander be put away from you, along with all
        malice.

The sins covered under the sixth commandment do not all lead to the literal
loss of life. The catechism does not begin with the sin of physical wounding
with an intent to kill and then move to sins of lesser severity. Instead, as in the
Sermon on the Mount, the Divines begin with the sins of the heart and move
outward. Special note is taken of the citation of Matthew 5:22 and 1 John 3:15.
Matthew 5:22 moves from the sin of the heart to verbal abuse. Jesus says that
the one who insults his brother should be subject to church discipline. Verbal
abuse is evidence of the status of the heart. John writes that the one who hates
his brother in his heart is a murderer and will not inherit eternal life. The sins
of the tongue reveal the heart. Scripture considers verbal abuse a very serious
sin. The church is called to respond to the same extent.
These sins, along with some of those that follow, serve as the confessional
basis for the existence of non-physical forms of abuse. Many people struggle
to define verbal, emotional, and/or psychological abuse because they are
difficult to prove. Indeed, victims of these forms of abuse recognize the
difficulty, often wishing their abusers would wound them physically so that
there would be evidence. Yet, because of what is shown in this catechism
answer, non-physical forms of abuse should be taken as seriously as if there
were visible bruises. These sins are a form of the taking away of life. By them
the life of an image-bearer is devalued, and great damage is done to the mind
and the soul.
Proverbs 14:30, cited here for envy, states that these non-physical sins have an
effect on the body, “rotting the bones.” This metaphorical language by
Solomon seems to acknowledge that non-physical forms of abuse can be
manifested physically in the nervous and immune systems. Our Reformed
distinctives affirm that a human being is not in essence only a soul, but a soul-
body union, so it should not be surprising that scientists have discovered that
damage to the soul affects the body.

                                       981
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Finally, the reference for “sinful passions” in Ephesians 4:31 demonstrates that
passions are not only sexual in nature. They include bitterness, wrath, anger,
clamor, slander, and malice. “Sinful passions,” biblically, include verbal,
emotional, and psychological abuse.

“Distracting cares; immoderate use of meat, drink, labour, and recreations”
    ●   Matthew 6:31, 34 ‒ “Therefore do not be anxious, saying,
        ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall
        we wear?’. . . Therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow, for
        tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient for the day is its
        own trouble.”
    ●   Isaiah 5:12 ‒ They have lyre and harp, tambourine and flute
        and wine at their feasts, but they do not regard the deeds of the
        LORD, or see the work of His hands.
         (Additional Scriptures cited: Luke 21:34; Rom. 13:13; Eccl.
         2:22-23; 12:12)
The primary relationship of the sins mentioned in these passages is of the
sinner to himself. These sins can be classified as either contributing factors to
abuse, or tools the abuser implements. Self-harm, or the threat of self-harm, is
the ultimate form of controlling behavior. It is used to manipulate others to
speak or act a certain way. This causes grave damage to those under their
authority. Children in particular suffer severe trauma when a parent self-harms,
having no categories for how to mediate what happened, how (if) they
contributed, and/or what they could have done to prevent the circumstances.

The catechism begins with anxiety as a root cause. Anxiety is often a reason
why an abuser does what he does. Many abusers were abused themselves.
Abuse can lead to disordered desires which cause people to sin and subjugate
others. Not all abusers are evil psychopaths. Many of them abuse others out of
a need to regulate their own fears, anxieties, and other negative feelings. There
may not even be a strong volitional intent to harm others, but they continue to
do harm in pursuit of their own self regardless of the harm that this self-pursuit
does to others. Addictive behaviors such as substance abuse, workaholism, and
an immoderate lifestyle, can be factors that compound the effects of abuse.

“Provoking words”

    ●   Proverbs 15:1 ‒ A soft answer turns away wrath, but a harsh
        word stirs up anger.
    ●   Proverbs 12:18 ‒ There is one whose rash words are like sword
        thrusts, but the tongue of the wise brings healing.
                                       982
                                   APPENDIX V



Another confessional basis for verbal abuse is causing a person to sin by using
provoking words. In the first reference from Proverbs 15, harsh words stir up
anger in the one sinned against, moving them to wrath. Under the fifth
commandment, causing someone to sin is a sin. In WLC 151, the multiplication
of sins makes a sin more heinous. Thus, when sinful speech causes another
person to sin, the sin is compounded. Also in WLC 151, power differentials
cause a sin to be even more heinous as when a superior uses provoking words
with an inferior. In Proverbs 12, verbal abuse is likened to stabbing with a
sword, a deadly weapon. Deadly weapons do grave damage. This is why Jesus
warns repeatedly: woe to those who cause “little ones” to sin (Matt. 18:6; Mark
9:42; Luke 17:2).

“Oppression”

    ●   Ezekiel 18:18 ‒ “As for his father, because he practiced
        extortion, robbed his brother, and did what is not good among
        his people, behold, he shall die for his iniquity.”
    ●   Exodus 1:14 ‒ And made their lives bitter with hard service, in
        mortar and brick, and in all kinds of work in the field. In all
        their work they ruthlessly made them work as slaves.

Oppression is the biblical word for abuse, cited here by the Divines and
appearing 116 times in the English Standard Version. The Divines cite Exodus
1:14, which states that the Egyptians made the lives of the Israelites bitter.
Verse 12 tells us that this bitterness is due to the oppression of the Israelites by
the Egyptians. The word used for oppression in verse 12 is ‫‘( ָע ָנָה‬anah), which
means “affliction.”27 When used in the Hebrew Piel, the word often means to
afflict by mistreating, as it does here. Examples of this usage are when Sarah
mistreats Hagar, Laban charges Jacob not to oppress his daughters, and the
command in Exodus 22:21-23 not to oppress orphans and widows. In studying
these usages of the verb, we can define oppression as it is used in the Bible as
“to afflict by mistreatment.” Anah (‫ ) ָענָה‬literally means, “to humble.” To
oppress is to cause someone to be humbled by ill-treatment. Humiliation in
this sense speaks to lasting damage: a person is brought low by mistreatment.




   27
      This is the standard Hebrew word used for oppression in the Old Testament,
appearing some 57 times in the Piel. (Piel is a verbal form in Hebrew that indicates
intensiveness.)
                                        983
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



“Quarrelling”

    ●   Galatians 5:15 ‒ But if you bite and devour one another, watch
        out that you are not consumed by one another.
    ●   Proverbs 23:29 ‒ Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has
        strife? Who has complaining? Who has wounds without cause?
        Who has redness of eyes?

Abusive relationships can be difficult to discern. Often, church leaders feel
trapped between the “he said, she said” dilemma and are unsure whom to
believe. This catechism question, along with the two verses cited, might even
be used as confessional evidence for that claim. Although victims of abuse can
be provoked to sinful responses to the oppressive behaviors against them, the
greater responsibility rests with the abuser. In the vast majority of cases, one
party has greater responsibility and has committed a more heinous sin. This is
especially true when the abuser is in authority over the abused. For increased
clarity regarding the nature of quarrels, Proverbs 23:29 suggests that asking
questions regarding the environment of the home (church, institution) can be
helpful.

“Striking, wounding, whatsoever else tends to the destruction of the life of
any”

        (Scriptures cited: Num. 35:16-18, 21; Ex. 21:18-36.)

The Divines demonstrate in these verses that striking, even when it does not
result in death, is sin. Exodus 21:18-19, cited here, sheds light on this:

        When men quarrel and one strikes the other with a stone or
        with his fist and the man does not die but takes to his bed, then
        if the man rises again and walks outdoors with his staff, he who
        struck him shall be clear; only he shall pay for the loss of his
        time, and shall have him thoroughly healed.

This passage describes physical assault that results in the incapacitation of the
victim (he “takes to his bed”). The assault described also results in long-term
damage (walks with a cane). This passage distinguishes between manslaughter
and assault. However, the one who assaults remains liable for his sin even if
he escapes the death penalty. Other penalties that remain include restitution.
The assailant is required to pay restitution to the victim for the loss of his time,
as well as pay for whatever care required to make the man whole. Presumably,
                                        984
                                   APPENDIX V



if the victim is permanently disabled, the assailant would be required to pay
more restitution. Physical abuse and assault that causes lasting damage is a
grievous sin necessitating disciplinary process. Protecting victims and
requiring restitution are appropriate responses by the church to cases of
physical assault. The same principle applies to nonphysical forms of abuse that
cause lasting damage.

The Divines conclude this answer with a catchall phrase lest implying that the
taking away of life is not limited to the examples provided. As biblical
evidence they cite an extended passage from Exodus 21. In studying this
passage, other forms of sin beyond physical abuse and assault require a
weighty response to all abuse. The text says, “But if there is harm, then you
shall pay life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burn for burn, wound for wound, stripe for stripe” (v. 24).

Consistent application of the principles gleaned from a study of the fifth and
sixth commandments exemplifies nonphysical forms of abuse as an unjust
taking away of life and is biblically and confessionally warranted.

The Seventh Commandment

You shall not commit adultery (Ex. 20:14).

The Divines’ exposition of the seventh commandment includes assault, abuse,
and harassment of a sexual nature.

        Q. 139 What are the sins forbidden in the seventh
        commandment?
        A. The sins forbidden in the seventh commandment, besides
        the neglect of the duties required, are adultery, fornication,
        rape, incest, sodomy, and all unnatural lusts; all unclean
        imaginations, thoughts, purposes, and affections; all corrupt or
        filthy communications, or listening thereunto; wanton looks,
        impudent or light behaviour, immodest apparel; prohibiting of
        lawful, and dispensing with unlawful marriages; allowing,
        tolerating, keeping of stews, and resorting to them; entangling
        vows of single life, undue delay of marriage; having more
        wives or husbands than one at the same time; unjust divorce,
        or desertion; idleness, gluttony, drunkenness, unchaste
        company, lascivious songs, books, pictures, dancings, stage


                                        985
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         plays; and all other provocations to, or acts of uncleanness,
         either in ourselves or others.

“adultery, fornication, . . . lascivious songs, books, pictures, dancings, stage
plays; and all other provocations to, or acts of uncleanness, either in ourselves
or others”

         (Scriptures cited: Heb. 13:4; Gal. 5:19; Eph. 5:4; Ezek. 23:14-16; Isa.
         23:15-17; Isa. 3:16; Mark 6:22; Rom. 13:13; 1 Peter 4:3; 2 Kings 9:30;
         Jer. 4:30; Ezek. 23:40.)

The Westminster Standards clearly prohibit sexual activity outside of marriage
and participating in and viewing pornography. Illicit sexual behavior is a tactic
abusers use. When an abuser coerces a victim to participate in illicit activities,
their shame is overwhelming. Shame is then a powerful weapon used to
perpetuate abuse and discourage the victim from reporting to authorities.
Coercion, or forcing victims to participate in sexual activities, can also fall
under the category of sexual assault. These sins are not simply sexual
immorality but may be considered forms of abuse.

“rape”

    ●    2 Samuel 13:14 ‒ But he would not listen to her, and being
         stronger than she, he forced [oppressed] her and lay with her.

The goal of the biblical and theological introduction has been to ground an
understanding of abuse in the teachings of the Westminster Standards, the
adopted interpretation of Scripture by the Presbyterian Church in America.28
The Westminster Standards do not have a separate category for sexual abuse
outside the sin of rape.29 Rape has a technical, legal definition that excludes
many additional forms of sexual abuse. In addition, some victims of sexual
abuse may not describe what happened to them as rape. However, in terms of
our Confessional Standards and the judicial basis for prosecution of
ecclesiastical cases of sexual abuse in the PCA, other forms of sexual abuse
fall under the prohibition of rape. In other words, the Standards’ prohibition of
rape is broader than what we would commonly call rape. Without the inclusion
of sexual abuse under the confessional category for rape, there is no other clear

   28
       See Introduction: The Structure of the Ad Interim Committee Report on
Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault.
    29
       There are some sins forbidden in WLC 139 that may contribute to sexual abuse,
but they do not constitute an overarching category.
                                        986
                                     APPENDIX V



prohibition of sexual abuse in our confessional standards. Therefore, it is
necessary to include all forms of sexual assault and abuse under the
confessional umbrella of rape.

The Scripture reference for rape given by the Divines is the story of Amnon’s
and his half-sister Tamar.30 The story is very clear. Amnon propositioned his
sister. She refused his proposition. Amnon forced Tamar to comply, and he
raped her. The use of force and vaginal penetration make this story a clear
instance of rape.

By analyzing the features of this story, we find that not only is rape described,
but sexual abuse in general, since many aspects of sexual abuse are present.
Amnon and Tamar were close acquaintances. He had a power dynamic over
her. He stalked her, groomed her, sexually harassed her, propositioned her, and
when she refused, he used force to initiate illicit sexual contact.31 After the
abuse occurred, he shunned her. The word used for rape here is the same
Hebrew word mentioned above for “oppression,” which is the general biblical
word for abuse. In fact, some older translations say that he “forced” her or
“humbled” her. The point is, while this is rape, it is not only rape. If there was



   30
       While this biblical story contains many of the aspects of sexual abuse, there is
one feature that may not occur in every instance: Tamar’s argument with and implied
struggle against Amnon. It is not a requirement for abuse to be considered abuse that
a victim must argue with and physically struggle against their abuser. Of note here is
that the passage does not explicitly record her crying out. The Mosaic Law required
betrothed virgins to cry out if they are being raped; however, Tamar was not betrothed,
so the same stipulations did not strictly apply. Nevertheless, she was in the city and in
a house where servants were located, so if she had cried out, someone may have come
to her aid. Despite the fact that she did not cry out, the Scriptures do not place any
blame on her, laying the fault solely on the evil actions of Amnon. Note also that the
Scriptures do not explicitly say that she struggled against him. It implies a struggle
when it says, “being stronger than she, he violated her and lay with her” (2 Sam.
13:14). The fact that it does not explicitly record a struggle, then makes it a feature of
the story but not a factor in consideration of whether or not something is sexual abuse.
    31
       The Hebrew word chazaq (“to be strong”) can be used in the Scriptures in a
nonphysical way. In Exodus 12:33, the Egyptians “urge” the Israelites to leave in
haste. In 2 Kings 4:8, the Shunammite “urges” Elisha to stay with her. This semantic
range opens up our understanding of Deuteronomy 22:25 and 2 Samuel 13:14 to
include forceful urging or coercion. See Katie McCoy, “God Is Not Silent: What the
Bible Teaches about Sexual Assault,” The Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission of
the Southern Baptist Convention (2017), https://erlc.com/resource-library/articles
/god-is-not-silent-what-the-bible-teaches-about-sexual-assault/.
                                           987
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



any other form of sexual contact in this story it would still be considered sexual
abuse.

Consent is a major part of the story of Amnon and Tamar. In verse 12, Tamar
pleads with her brother, “Do not oppress me, for such a thing is not done in
Israel.” The verb is in the Piel, thus a forceful affliction by mistreatment is
signified. In both the 1611 King James Version and the 1599 Geneva Bible,
the translations the Divines used, this verb is translated “to force.” In those
translations Tamar says, “Do not force me” (v. 12). Consent is key. If she had
consented to be a willing participant, it would have been the sin of incest, not
rape.32

Since consent is a key factor in the confessional definition of rape, it follows
that any sexual activity where consent is not given, can’t be given, or consent
is impaired, falls under the umbrella of the confessional prohibition of rape.33
Impairment of consent exists in a differential of power (boss with subordinates,
pastor with parishioners), age, or state of consciousness (including a person
impaired by a substance). If two peers attend a party and one of them becomes
intoxicated, it is considered sexual assault if the other takes advantage of the
impaired person. The requirement for consent also extends to the marriage bed.
If an intimate partner does not consent and the other persists and engages in
sexual relations, it is considered sexual assault.

With regard to child sexual abuse, whenever an adult sexually abuses a minor,
it falls under the confessional umbrella of rape because children are unable to
consent to sexual activity with adults.

Often, abuse in the church involves young adults and/or teenagers. Young
adult or youth leaders possess a power dynamic with younger teens that
impairs the ability to consent. This raises the heinousness of the sin beyond
sexual immorality to abuse.

The sins WLC 139 includes in rape are recognized as crimes in many legal
jurisdictions. Presbyteries and Sessions must understand mandatory reporting
laws applicable to their locale. When a crime has been committed, Romans 13
takes precedence over Matthew 18. Adult victims must be consulted before

   32
       Note here that we use the phrase, “consenting to be a willing participant.” A
person may be berated and coerced into giving in, but that may not be the same as
willing consent. Wisdom is required in discerning the difference.
    33
       This is not to say that all sexual abuse is the same in degree of severity. WLC
151 still applies here.
                                         988
                                    APPENDIX V



reporting their abuse to authorities. No report should be made against an adult
victim’s consent.34 However, if the civil authorities decline to investigate or
prosecute, the church is responsible to pursue the matter within the
ecclesiastical court. The duties outlined for responding to abuse remain in
effect. (See “Reporting” in each section of this report for further information
on reporting different forms of abuse.)

“All corrupt or filthy communications, or listening thereunto; wanton looks”

         (Scriptures cited: Eph. 5:3-4; Prov. 7:5, 21-22; Isa. 3:16; 2 Peter 2:14.)

Scripture forbids all crude or lascivious speech and behavior. This type of
speech and/or behavior toward others sinfully diminishes image-bearers. If
there is any form of power differential in the relationship, it is classified as
sexual harassment. It is also considered harassment in the absence of a power
differential if the comments are unwanted and are severe or repeated. If a
pattern of such harassment persists over a prolonged period, it can be classified
as abusive. All forms of sexual harassment are subject to the discipline of the
church. (See considerations of WLC 151 above for further discussion on power
differentials.)

“Impudent or light behaviour, immodest apparel . . . gluttony, drunkenness,
unchaste company, lascivious songs, books, pictures, dancings, stage plays;
and all other provocations to, or acts of uncleanness, either in ourselves or
others”

         (Scriptures cited: Prov. 7:10, 13; Ezek. 16:49; Prov. 23:30-33; Gen.
         39:10; Eph. 5:4; Ezek. 23:14-16; Isa. 23:15-17; Isa. 3:16; Mark 6:22;
         Rom. 13:13; 1 Peter 4:3; 2 Kings 9:30; Jer. 4:30; Ezek. 23:40.)

Do these passages indicate victims contribute to their abuse?

First, no person is without sin. But does sin contribute or lead to abuse or
assault? Abuse or assault is never stipulated as a form of punishment in the
Scriptures, speaking to the fact that no one deserves abuse or assault.
Attributing a victim’s sin, appearance, friends, and/or recreations to an assault
minimizes the sin of the abuser. Scripture is clear: we cannot make someone
sin; people choose to sin (James 1:14). Predators have been known to


    34
       The exception to this is if the adult was a minor when the abuse occurred and
there is reason to suspect that ongoing abuse may be occurring involving other minors.
                                         989
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



intentionally pursue these vulnerabilities because the target is easier prey and
society will attribute at least part of the blame on them. In the church, we must
judge justly with clear eyes. All sin is not equal. God deals with sin
proportionate to the evil that has been committed and directly with the heart
that commits it. A victim’s sin can be addressed outside of the abusive
situation, giving adequate time and resources to heal from the effects of the
more heinous crime committed against them. However, care must be taken to
express that the abuse is not their fault.

Second, these verses regarding the seductress, along with many similar
passages, characterize the danger of idolatry in general, or of the people of
Israel, the bride of Yahweh. This can be seen in many of the Proverbs, the
Prophets (especially Ezekiel), and Revelation. Throughout the Prophets,
enemy cities are also personified as women. The use of this analogy is not
necessarily meant to emphasize the danger women pose to men. In reality, the
majority of instances of sinful seduction recorded in the Bible are of men
taking advantage of women (Gen. 19:4-5; Gen. 34, 38; Judg. 19:22-25; 2 Sam.
11; 2 Sam. 13).

Blaming the victim is one of the main reasons wounded people don’t come
forward. Shepherds help victims report by listening, hearing them, and
reserving judgment.

“Unjust divorce, or desertion”

    ●   Malachi 2:16 ‒ “For the man who does not love his wife but
        divorces her,” says the LORD, the God of Israel, “covers his
        garment with violence,” says the LORD of hosts. So guard
        yourselves in your spirit, and do not be faithless.
    ●   Matthew 5:32 ‒ But I say to you that everyone who divorces
        his wife, except on the ground of sexual immorality, makes her
        commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman
        commits adultery.
    ●   1 Corinthians 7:12-13 ‒ To the rest I say (I, not the Lord) that
        if any brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents
        to live with him, he should not divorce her. If any woman has
        a husband who is an unbeliever, and he consents to live with
        her, she should not divorce him.




                                      990
                                     APPENDIX V



The 20th General Assembly of the PCA produced a study Report on Divorce
and Remarriage.35 The committee concluded that grounds for divorce is
porneia.36 It also acknowledged the possibility of a believer divorcing an
unbelieving spouse because of desertion.37 The report states that in a case when
“words and actions on the part of one spouse that threatens the life of the other
spouse and/or children, that the one(s) threatened should be counseled by the
Session, or representative thereof, to remove themselves from the threatening
situation.”38 After those threatened are protected and moved to safety, “the
Session should investigate, whether these words and actions are in effect
breaking the one-flesh relationship by ‘hating’ the abused spouse and not
‘nourishing and cherishing’ this one (Eph. 5:28-29). . . .When it is determined
by the Session that the abuser does not appear to them to be Christian and the
abuse continues,” 39 the church court should excommunicate the abuser. After
this, the believing spouse may seek a divorce in the civil courts.40 In response
to this report, the 20th General Assembly adopted the following
recommendations (see Minutes of the 20th General Assembly, pp. 59-60.):

       ●   When an unbeliever separates from the marriage relationship
           with a believer, the believer is free from that marriage and free
           to remarry but only in the Lord (1 Cor. 7:15, 39)
           [Recommendation 2.f].
       ●   The believer in the aforementioned case is free to make the
           biblical divorce legal in the eyes of the state [Recommendation
           2.h].
       ●   Under extreme circumstances, a Session following the BCO
           may properly judge that such desertion (separation) has
           occurred, even though the deserting spouse is still physically
           present in the home (“desertion” being viewed in the sense
           understood in the study report on divorce, Chapter 2, Section
           II.E.4.) [Recommendation 2.g].

Section II.E.4 of the report begins by saying:


   35
        This report is found in the Minutes of the 20th General Assembly (1992), 513-
636.
   36
      Minutes of the 20th General Assembly (Atlanta: Stated Clerk of the General
Assembly, 1992), 633-635.
   37
      Ibid, 634-635.
   38
      Ibid.
   39
      Ibid.
   40
      Ibid.
                                         991
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        “. . .We must be careful not to open the floodgate of excuses.
        On the other hand, we need to recognize the reality of the
        ‘separation.’ We should allow sessions the liberty to discern
        with much prayer what would be the proper response in
        particular circumstance.

        Several considerations incline us to agree with those of our
        authorities who have maintained that desertion can occur as
        well by the imposition of intolerable conditions as by departure
        itself. We are struck by the fact that, taking
        Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7 together, it appears that the
        Lord concedes the necessity of the abolition of marriage in
        certain cases precisely so as to protect a blameless spouse from
        intolerable conditions. Further, taking into account both the
        general principles of biblical ethics and the Scripture's
        characteristic manner of ethical instruction, viz. the statement
        of commandments in a general form to which is added case law
        sufficient to indicate the manner of application, it seems to us
        that those Reformed authorities are correct who have argued
        that sins which are tantamount in extremity and consequence
        to actual desertion should be understood to produce similar
        eventualities (cf. Larger Catechism, Q. 99, A. 6).

        What is more, a husband's violence, particularly to the degree
        that it endangers his wife's safety, if unremedied, seems to us,
        by any application of Biblical norms, to be as much a ruination
        of the marriage in fact as adultery or actual departure. This is
        so precisely because his violence separates them, either by her
        forced withdrawal from the home or by the profound cleavage
        between them which the violence produces, as surely as would
        his own departure, and is thus an expression of his
        unwillingness―to consent to live with her in marriage (1 Cor.
        7:12-13; Eph. 5:28-29). Further, insofar as the “passivity” of
        the blameless spouse is an important prerequisite in Paul‘s
        permission of the dissolution of marriage on account of
        desertion, it seems right to note that in the case of physical
        abuse, for example, the blameless spouse is similarly
        victimized.”41



41
     Ibid., 562-563.
                                     992
                                   APPENDIX V



In Appendix 1 of the report, an ad hoc committee of Philadelphia Presbytery
formed and was chaired by Rev. Dr. William S. Barker.42 Dr. Barker is the
former Dean of Westminster Seminary, Philadelphia, President of Covenant
Seminary, St. Louis, and the Moderator of the 22nd General Assembly of the
PCA. In the ad hoc committee analysis of the Westminster Divines’ allowance
for divorce due to abuse, the report concluded:

        . . . When physical abuse is occurring in a marriage, the church
        must deal with a situation which, as the Puritans saw, is
        contrary to God’s purpose for marriage. A temporary
        separation may be necessary for safety, which the church may
        need to facilitate, and the abusing partner should be
        disciplined, with helpful counsel but eventually to the point of
        excommunication if there is no repentance in deed as well as
        in word. The situation is complicated in our cultural setting
        when the marriage partner is not a member of a church, or is a
        member of some other church; nevertheless, discipline must be
        attempted. Only after a suitable length of time and a sufficient
        process of church discipline should a divorce be granted for
        such a desertion of one’s marriage partner and the marriage
        covenant. (This is essentially the conclusion reached by David
        D. Prescott in The Problem of Wife Abuse: Wife Abuse and
        Pastoral Counseling, Westminster Theological Seminary
        D.Min. project, 1991; cf. pp. 212-221 on “Divorce: Is It a
        Possibility?”)

        In its understanding of the Bible’s teaching on divorce as
        “nothing but adultery or such willful desertion as can no way
        be remedied by the Church or civil magistrate is cause
        sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage,”43 the
        Westminster Assembly was seeking to steer the Scriptural path


    42
       Ibid., 607-621. In this analysis the committee leaned heavily upon the work of
Dr. David C. Jones, erstwhile professor of ethics at Covenant Seminary, and member
of several PCA GA study committees. See also David C. Jones, “The Westminster
Confession on Divorce and Remarriage,” Presbyterion XVI, 1 (Spring 1990), 17-40.
    The complete report as well as other PCA documents on divorce and remarriage
can be found in What God Has Joined Together: The PCA Papers on Divorce and
Remarriage (Lawrenceville, GA: PCA Administrative Committee and Committee on
Discipleship Ministries, 2021).
    43
       WCF 24:6.
                                        993
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         between two demonstrable extremes44 and in the process
         uphold God' s high ideal for marriage. On the one hand, this
         ruled out the Roman Catholic concept of no divorce, allowing
         divorce for adultery and under certain circumstances desertion.
         On the other hand, it ruled out divorce for incompatibility as
         some such as Milton were advocating. Physical abuse of a
         spouse was seen as contrary to the biblical purpose for
         marriage and would thus be grounds for church discipline and
         could, if it led to prolonged separation without remedy,
         become a cause for dissolution of a marriage. Such
         circumstantial details can be handled only by a body of elders
         cognizant of and close to the situation. Whereas proven
         adultery would be readily acknowledged as grounds for a
         divorce, desertion on the basis of physical abuse as a cause for
         dissolution of a marriage should be determined from the
         circumstances by the local session or in the case of a minister
         by the presbytery.45

To summarize, the Westminster Confession (24:6) allows for divorce in the
case of willful desertion, and the 20th General Assembly study committee
report on divorce and remarriage allowed divorce in certain circumstances of
abuse when a spouse is living under intolerable conditions. Intolerable
conditions consist of more than physical violence on the part of the abuser. An
abuser can create intolerable living conditions without ever laying a hand on
his spouse or children. The Domestic Abuse section of this report will cover
nonphysical tactics the abuser might use to create intolerable living conditions.

Secondly, the Divines’ citation of Malachi 2:16 included the phrase, “God
hates divorce.” While this was the former understanding, many scholars
understand this to be a mistranslation. Thus, the ESV translates the verse,
“When a man hates his wife and divorces . . .” This translation is supported by
both the Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate.46 Excommunication should be

    44
        These extremes were the Roman Catholic position of no divorce and the
Zwinglian position that had six allowable grounds for divorce, “adultery, impotence,
willful desertion, grave incompatibility, sexually incapacitating illness, and
deception,” M20GA, 609-610.
    45
       Ibid., 620-621. Emphasis added.
    46
       Please see the following essay by Covenant Seminary Old Testament Professor
C. John Collins. It is quite thorough: https://www.academia.edu/5304267
/Malachi_2_16_again_. Collins argues that the translation, “God hates divorce,” relies
on changing the vowel “pointings” of the Masoretic Text. Collins further states that
                                         994
                                    APPENDIX V



avoided as a penalty for a wife who has fled her abuser. Even if it is eventually
determined she was erroneous for pursuing divorce, the primary duty of a
shepherd is a careful and prayerful approach to best address the difficulty of a
wife living in a situation that threatens her (and/or her children’s) well-being.

This report will deal with the issue of divorce in more depth in Attachment 11:
“Divorce and Abuse.” The topic of divorce in cases of domestic abuse
constitutes more study on desertion and how one should think and adjudicate
covenant breaking behavior. It must be asked, at what point is nonphysical
abuse intolerable and dangerous?

The Ninth Commandment

You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor (Ex. 20:16).

The sins of the ninth commandment that contribute to abuse have been covered
above (under the sixth commandment). This section will address three
additional items in the exposition of the ninth commandment that relate to the
investigation of abuse allegations, the response of the church to abuse, proper
repentance of an abuser, and the issue of false reports.

         Q. 144 What are the duties required in the ninth
         commandment?
         A. The duties required in the ninth commandment are, the
         preserving and promoting of truth between man and man, and
         the good name of our neighbour, as well as our own; appearing
         and standing for the truth; and from the heart, sincerely, freely,
         clearly, and fully, speaking the truth, and only the truth, in
         matters of judgment and justice, and in all other things
         whatsoever; a charitable esteem of our neighbours; loving,
         desiring, and rejoicing in their good name; sorrowing for, and


the LXX and Vulgate both testify against the KJV rendering and that Martin Luther,
John Calvin, and the 1560 Geneva Bible agree with the Vulgate in their own
translations. Therefore, the King James Version's translation of Micah 2:16 as “God
hates divorce,” was an innovation. The influence of the KJV is evident in many of our
modern translations, including the NASB and NKJV, translations used by many PCA
elders. Interestingly, as Collins points out, The Westminster Annotations and
Commentary on the Whole Bible list both translations (“God hates divorce” and “if a
man hates his wife and divorces”) as potential options and favors neither one. See also
the PCA GA AIC on Marriage and Divorce which agrees, in essence, with our
exegesis: M20GA, 207.
                                         995
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        covering of their infirmities; freely acknowledging of their
        gifts and graces, defending their innocency; a ready receiving
        of a good report, and unwillingness to admit of an evil report,
        concerning them; discouraging tale-bearers, flatterers, and
        slanderers; love and care of our own good name, and defending
        it when need requireth; keeping of lawful promises; studying
        and practising of whatsoever things are true, honest, lovely,
        and of good report.

“preserving and promoting of truth . . . appearing and standing for the truth .
. . in matters of judgment and justice”

    •   Zechariah 8:16 ‒ These are the things that you shall do: Speak
        the truth to one another; render in your gates judgments that
        are true and make for peace;
    •   Proverbs 31:8-9 ‒ Open your mouth for the mute, for the rights
        of all who are destitute. Open your mouth, judge righteously,
        defend the rights of the poor and needy.
    •   Joshua 7:19 ‒ Then Joshua said to Achan, “My son, give glory
        to the LORD God of Israel and give praise to Him. And tell me
        now what you have done; do not hide it from me.”
    •   Leviticus 19:15 ‒ “You shall do no injustice in court. You shall
        not be partial to the poor or defer to the great, but in
        righteousness shall you judge your neighbor.”
    •   Proverbs 14:5, 25 ‒ A faithful witness does not lie, but a false
        witness breathes out lies. A truthful witness saves lives, but
        one who breathes out lies is deceitful.

The positive duty under the ninth commandment is to preserve and promote
truth. Application of this principle results in the duty of church courts, to the
best of their ability, to discover the truth in allegations of abuse. This translates
to a duty to undertake a thorough, competent, and unbiased investigation as
demonstrated in the Scriptures cited above. Zechariah 8:16 (NAS 1995) says,
“Judge with truth.” Proverbs 31:9 (NAS 1995) instructs, “. . . judge
righteously, and defend the rights of the poor and afflicted.” Leviticus 19:15
(NAS 1995) implores, “do no injustice in judgment.” The key to judging
righteously, as Scripture commands, is to discover the truth.

Joshua 7:19 depicts an investigation. Even after Achan was discovered by lot
to be the source of God’s judgment in the defeat at Ai, Joshua calls Achan
forward and questions him. Joshua follows up in order to fully discover the
                                        996
                                   APPENDIX V



truth. It was not enough to know Achan was guilty; the truth needed to be
discovered and disclosed.

The perniciousness of false reports is included in the discussion of WLC 145
below. While false reports are rare, the best way to protect against them is to
undertake an investigation to discover the truth.47 The question (Q. 145) below
also warns against prejudicing the truth. The best way to avoid prejudging a
matter is to engage a competent third party to perform an unbiased
investigation. The question below further warns against passing unjust
sentence. The best way to avoid passing unjust sentence is to perform a
competent and thorough investigation.

The duty to investigate is codified in the Book of Church Order (emphasis
added):

        31-2. It is the duty of all church Sessions and Presbyteries to
        exercise care over those subject to their authority. They shall
        with due diligence and great discretion demand from such
        persons satisfactory explanations concerning reports affecting
        their Christian character. This duty is more imperative when
        those who deem themselves aggrieved by injurious reports
        shall ask an investigation.

        If such investigation, however originating, should result in
        raising a strong presumption of the guilt of the party involved,
        the court shall institute process, and shall appoint a prosecutor
        to prepare the indictment and to conduct the case. This
        prosecutor shall be a member of the court, except that in a case
        before the Session, he may be any communing member of the
        same congregation with the accused.

The BCO clearly states the court’s duty when someone reports abuse: it is to
perform a thorough investigation and demand explanations concerning the
report. If the investigation raises a strong presumption of guilt, the court must
institute process by appointing a prosecutor and preparing an indictment. The
BCO does not prohibit a Session from enlisting the help of a third party in
performing an investigation.



   47
      See Attachment 7: Myths about Abuse for information on the frequency of false
reports.
                                       997
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Therefore, the duty of a church court is to perform thorough, competent, and
unbiased investigations in order to preserve and promote the truth and to judge
righteously. While a direct and explicit duty to engage a competent third party
is not found here, it is advised by this committee in order to best fulfill the
duties required and sins forbidden in the ninth commandment.

        Q. 145 What are the sins forbidden in the ninth
        commandment?
        A. The sins forbidden in the ninth commandment are, all
        prejudicing the truth, and the good name of our neighbours, as
        well as our own, especially in public judicature; giving false
        evidence, suborning false witnesses, wittingly appearing and
        pleading for an evil cause, out-facing and overbearing the
        truth; passing unjust sentence, calling evil good, and good evil;
        rewarding the wicked according to the work of the righteous,
        and the righteous according to the work of the wicked; forgery,
        concealing the truth, undue silence in a just cause, and holding
        our peace when iniquity calleth for either a reproof from
        ourselves, or complaint to others; speaking the truth
        unseasonably, or maliciously to a wrong end, or perverting it
        to a wrong meaning, or in doubtful and equivocal expressions,
        to the prejudice of truth or justice; speaking untruth, lying,
        slandering, backbiting, detracting, tale-bearing, whispering,
        scoffing, reviling, rash, harsh, and partial censuring;
        misconstructing intentions, words, and actions; flattering,
        vain-glorious boasting, thinking or speaking too highly or too
        meanly of ourselves or others; denying the gifts and graces of
        God; aggravating smaller faults; hiding, excusing, or
        extenuating of sins, when called to a free confession;
        unnecessary discovering of infirmities; raising false rumours,
        receiving and countenancing evil reports, and stopping our ears
        against just defence; evil suspicion; envying or grieving at the
        deserved credit of any, endeavouring or desiring to impair it,
        rejoicing in their disgrace and infamy; scornful contempt, fond
        admiration; breach of lawful promises; neglecting such things
        as are of good report, and practising, or not avoiding ourselves,
        or not hindering what we can in others, such things as procure
        an ill name. (WLC 1:145 WCS)




                                      998
                                 APPENDIX V



“Concealing the truth, undue silence in a just cause, and holding our peace
when iniquity calleth for either a reproof from ourselves, or complaint to
others”

    ●   Leviticus 5:1 ‒ “If anyone sins in that he hears a public
        adjuration to testify, and though he is a witness, whether he has
        seen or come to know the matter, yet does not speak, he shall
        bear his iniquity;”
    ●   1 Kings 1:6 ‒ His father had never at any time displeased him
        by asking, “Why have you done thus and so?” He was also a
        very handsome man, and he was born next after Absalom.

        (Additional Scriptures cited: Deut. 13:8; Acts 5:3, 8-9; 2 Tim. 4:6; Lev.
        19:17; Isa. 59:4.)

This clause furthers the duties covered under the fifth commandment. Abusers
thrive on silence. Evil loves darkness. Thus, leaders should speak generally
about the issue of abuse and specifically when abuse occurs in the community.
The church or institution’s reputation is secondary to reproving and
discountenancing evil. When church leaders are not open about abuse, they
discourage members who notice problematic patterns of behavior, as well as
corroborating witnesses, from coming forward. Abuse dissipates when
brought into the light.

“Hiding, excusing, or extenuating of sins, when called to a free confession”

    ●   Proverbs 28:13 ‒ Whoever conceals his transgressions will not
        prosper, but he who confesses and forsakes them will obtain
        mercy.
    ●   Proverbs 30:20 ‒ This is the way of an adulteress: she eats and
        wipes her mouth and says, “I have done no wrong.”
    ●   Genesis 3:12-13 ‒ The man said, “The woman whom you gave
        to be with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate.” Then
        the LORD God said to the woman, “What is this that you have
        done?” The woman said, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.”
    ●   Jeremiah 2:35 ‒ You say, “I am innocent; surely His anger has
        turned from me.” Behold, I will bring you to judgment for
        saying, “I have not sinned.”
    ●   2 Kings 5:25 ‒ He went in and stood before his master, and
        Elisha said to him, “Where have you been, Gehazi?” And he
        said, “Your servant went nowhere.”
                                      999
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●    Genesis 4:9 ‒ Then the LORD said to Cain, “Where is Abel
         your brother?” He said, “I do not know; am I my brother's
         keeper?”

The Scripture passages above articulate unrepentant sin. One who is truly
repentant will offer a free and full confession without hedging, hiding, or
blaming others. They will confess fully, not simply confessing to those sins
for which they have been caught. The WCF 15.5 reads, “Men ought not to
content themselves with a general repentance, but it is every man’s duty to
endeavor to repent of his particular sins particularly” (Ps. 19:13; Luke 19:8; 1
Tim. 1:13, 15).

Struggling with lust, a lack of sex, or a problem with substance abuse is not
the foundation nor rationale for abuse. These are excuses. Abuse is a grave sin,
magnified by many factors seen in the analysis of WLC 151 above. Scripture
tells us that leaders call sinners to account. They do not conceal the truth by
excusing or lessening sin. Scriptures call shepherds to protect sheep, bring evil
out from the dark, and hold offenders accountable.

 “Raising false rumours, receiving and countenancing evil reports, and
stopping our ears against just defence”

    ●    Exodus 23:1 ‒ “You shall not spread a false report. You shall
         not join hands with a wicked man to be a malicious witness.”

         (Additional Scriptures cited: Prov. 29:12; Acts 7:56-57; Job 31:13-
         14.)

These passages affirm that false reports happen. False reporting is pernicious
and evil, as the accompanying Scripture shows. Falsely reporting abuses,
however, is rare.48 Scripture narrates one instance of a woman falsely accusing
a man of abuse (Gen. 39:14-15), yet multiple instances of men misusing
women.49 The Bible also tells us God will not be mocked (Gal. 6:7) and He
will reveal this darkness (Job 12:13-25; Dan. 2:22; 1 Cor. 4:5).

“Believe victims” is a common slogan today because of #metoo. To believe
those who report abuse does not negate exploration of the claims. For leaders

   48
       The frequency of false reports for cases of physical and sexual abuse is estimated
to be between 2% and 10%. See Attachment 7: Myths about Abuse for information on
the frequency of false reports.
    49
       Genesis 19:4-5 34; 38; Judges 19:22-25; 2 Samuel 11; 13.
                                          1000
                                  APPENDIX V



in the church, “believe victims” means taking necessary actions to protect first.
After physical safety is ensured, church courts can then discern the truth in the
allegations.

Deuteronomy 22:25-27 states:

        “But if in the open country a man meets a young woman who
        is betrothed, and the man seizes her and lies with her, then only
        the man who lay with her shall die. But you shall do nothing to
        the young woman; she has committed no offense punishable
        by death. For this case is like that of a man attacking and
        murdering his neighbor, because he met her in the open
        country, and though the betrothed young woman cried for help
        there was no one to rescue her.”

This passage articulates that a woman should be believed when there are no
witnesses or evidence (“out in the country”). Abuse rarely happens in the
presence of a witness. In this situation, the man is to die and “you shall do
nothing to the young woman.” This passage implies false reports of abuse are
rare. As mentioned above, the best way to fulfill the duty to defend against
false reports is to engage a qualified third party to investigate.

Conclusion

The purpose of this biblical and confessional introduction has been twofold.
First was to demonstrate that since PCA elders are bound by oath to the ethical
teachings of the Westminster Standards, it follows that they are bound by oath
to whatever the Standards teach concerning abuse. Second was to expound
what the Westminster Standards teach concerning abuse.

The Westminster Larger Catechism’s exposition of the Ten Commandments
is a valuable resource for guiding the ethics of the church. Specifically, the
Divines’ thorough biblical study provides a powerful set of tools for
understanding abuse from a biblical and confessional perspective. This study
grounds our understanding of abuse in the Holy Scriptures and God’s heart for
victims. His desire is that we discountenance evil by bringing it into the light
of day.

Here are the key takeaways from this biblical and confessional study of abuse:



                                      1001
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        1. The existence of power differentials is demonstrated by the
           Standards, factoring in what is considered abuse and increasing
           the severity of the damage done;
        2. The categories of abuse discussed in this report—physical, sexual,
           spiritual, and psychological—all have strong biblical support;
        3. Church leaders have a duty to educate their people on the issues
           of abuse and to develop robust protection and prevention policies;
        4. Church leaders have a duty to respond well to abuse by protecting
           victims, undertaking a competent, unbiased investigation,
           discountenancing evil, and providing patient care for those
           affected; and
        5. Though an explicit duty cannot be located in the Standards, an
           independent, third party investigation is advisable in order to
           discover the truth.

The goal of the Introduction was to present the confessional case for
responding to abuse. The remainder of this report will describe what a practical
response involves. Sections Two through Six may not read like a typical PCA
study report. This is because they will begin with the assumption of the biblical
and theological understanding of abuse presented in Section One and proceed
to a practical development of the biblical and theological content in
implementable ways. To put it another way, the introduction has attempted to
establish the “why”; the remaining material will answer the “what” and the
“how.”

Elders in the Presbyterian Church in America take the vow to “sincerely
receive and adopt the Confession of Faith and the Catechisms of this Church,
as containing the system of doctrine taught in the Holy Scriptures,” (BCO 21-
5, 24-6). Therefore, the Larger Catechism’s teachings (hereafter, WLC) on the
Ten Commandments are the official ethical teachings of the PCA. As such, the
WLC serves as the basis for how elders are to engage in church discipline.




                                      1002
                                     APPENDIX V



BCO 27-1 teaches that discipline has two aspects:
1. the one referring to the whole government, inspection, training,
guardianship and control which the church maintains over its members, its
officers and its courts;
2. the other a restricted and technical sense, signifying judicial process.

Therefore, the Constitution of the PCA requires elders, as a part of the
discipline of the church, to train its members in the ethical teachings of the
WLC, to inspect the members of the church in their adherence to ethical
behavior as taught by the WLC, and to govern, guard, and control the church
according to the ethical teachings of the WLC. When correction necessitates
judicial process, the subject matter of the WLC serves as the basis for
adjudication.50

For these reasons, this report will ground its understanding of abuse in the
ethical teachings of the WLC found in its exposition of the Ten
Commandments.

While the technical terms describing abuse do not appear in The Westminster
Standards, the sinful behaviors that these terms describe do. All forms of abuse
described in this report are instances of “misuse,” but more specifically they
are misuses of power. This includes power that is (but is not limited to):

         ● Physical force that is used to strike, wound, or force someone to
           do something to which they do not consent;
         ● Authority that forces someone against their consent and wounds:
               o Formally recognized authority,
               o Familial authority, such as parents have over children,
               o Informal relational authority, such as exhibited by Sunday
                   School teachers or other workers who have charge over
                   children, and/or
               o Relational authority, such as that of respected members of
                   the church.

   50
      BCO 29-1, “An offense, the proper object of judicial process, is anything in the
doctrines or practice of a Church member professing faith in Christ which is contrary
to the Word of God. The Confession of Faith and The Larger and Shorter Catechisms
of the Westminster Assembly, together with the formularies of government, discipline,
and worship are accepted by the Presbyterian Church in America as standard
expositions of the teachings of Scripture in relation to both faith and practice. Nothing,
therefore, ought to be considered by any court as an offense, or admitted as a matter
of accusation, which cannot be proved to be such from Scripture,” (emphasis added).
                                          1003
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




Misuse of power may also be exhibited in differences of age, in those who are
developmentally or intellectually more advanced, and/or in numbers or
financial influence.51

The Westminster Larger Catechism

The WLC lays out the sins of misuse of authority very clearly: aggravations
that make some sins more heinous than others, failure of superiors in their duty
towards inferiors, and sins of superiors against inferiors.52 These serve as the
theological basis for our understanding of abuse.

In the analysis below we will state the catechism question and answer in full
and then work through pertinent clauses from the answer with the Scripture
verses cited by the Westminster Assembly. While we do not receive and adopt
the Scripture references as a part of our Constitution, we should give them due
consideration as they are the biblical basis that the Assembly adopted for what
they wrote. Some of the more pertinent Scripture citations will be printed in
full, but the reader is encouraged to keep Bible in hand in order to read all the
references.

WLC 151 on Aggravations That Make Sins More Heinous

The basic principle gleaned from this catechism answer is more heinous sins
cause more damage. Because heinous sins cause significant damage, they are
to be punished more severely, and victims are to be shown greater care. Many
instances are abusive due to the aggravating factors mentioned below. Abuse
is not merely one instance by a "hot head," nor is it excusable because of the
infrequency of the aggression. Apologizing does not negate abuse. Women do


   51
       Please see below under WLC 129, 130, and 151 for a fuller theological
discussion.
    52
       For those that are unfamiliar with the Westminster Standards, the language of
superiors and inferiors may seem jarring. This is because in modern usage, these words
imply a value judgment of being of better or poorer in quality or worth. However, in
the 17th century the terms “inferior” and “superior” simply referred to a reference of
position. For example, the phrase, “the ground is inferior to the sky,” means simply
that the ground is lower than the sky. In modern American society further questions
may be raised by the implication of position or class among peoples. To this we must
understand that the Westminster Standards are not advocating for a societal class
system. Rather, this language is used to describe relationships of authority and
submission, a concept that is thoroughly biblical.
                                        1004
                                  APPENDIX V



not deserve to be abused because of their actions, wardrobe, or any other
factor. Aggravating factors such as power differentials, the presence of
covenant relationships, multiform sins, and repeated sins greatly magnify the
damage to a victim’s soul. Recognizing these factors is key to identifying and
responding well.

Q. 151 What are those aggravations that make some sins more heinous than
others?
A. Sins receive their aggravations, 1. From the persons offending: if they be
of riper age, greater experience or grace, eminent for profession, gifts, place,
office, guides to others, and whose example is likely to be followed by others.
2. From the parties offended: if immediately against God, his attributes, and
worship; against Christ, and his grace; the Holy Spirit, his witness, and
workings; against superiors, men of eminency, and such as we stand especially
related and engaged unto; against any of the saints, particularly weak brethren,
the souls of them, or any other, and the common good of all or many. 3. From
the nature and quality of the offence: if it be against the express letter of the
law, break many commandments, contain in it many sins: if not only conceived
in the heart, but breaks forth in words and actions, scandalize others, and admit
of no reparation: if against means, mercies, judgments, light of nature,
conviction of consciousness, publick or private admonition, censures of the
church, civil punishments; and our prayers, purposes, promises, vows,
covenants, and engagements to God or men: if done deliberately, wilfully,
presumptuously, impudently, boastingly, maliciously, frequently, obstinately,
with delight, continuance, or relapsing after repentance. 4. From circumstances
of time and place: if on the Lord's day, or other times of divine worship; or
immediately before or after these, or other helps to prevent or remedy such
miscarriages: if in publick, or in the presence of others, who are thereby likely
to be provoked or defiled.

“From the persons offending: if they be of riper age, greater experience or
grace, eminent for profession, gifts, place, office, guides to others, and whose
example is likely to be followed by others.”

(Scriptures cited: Jer. 2:8; Eccl. 4:13; 1 Kings 11:4, 9; 2 Sam. 12:14; 1 Cor.
5:1; James 4:17; Luke 12:47-48; Jer. 5:4-5; 2 Sam. 12:7-9; Ezek. 8:11-12;
Rom. 2:17-24; Gal. 2:11-14.)

The WLC and supporting Scripture show that the sins of those in authority are
more heinous, causing more damage and deserving of greater punishment
because of the position of authority. The confession supports the existence of
                                      1005
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



a differential of power in certain relationships. In each of the instances
mentioned, summarized as leadership status, age, and knowledge of the faith,
we find accompanying power over another. Power can be misused in order to
control, oppress, and harm others. When the misuse of power occurs, it may
be considered an abuse of authority.

Superiors are not necessarily official, ordained leaders of the church. Superiors
can be prominent members who are well-respected due to their knowledge or
faith practice. They can be Sunday school teachers, youth leaders, committee
chairpersons, or ministry team leaders. They can also be someone more
advanced in age. These power differentials should be considered in an abusive
situation. The harm done by leaders has a greater impact on the ones they harm.
A shepherd that takes advantage of his position to pillage his own flock is not
a shepherd (Ezek. 34).

“Particularly weak brethren, the souls of them”

(Scriptures cited: 1 Cor. 8:11-12; Rom. 14:13, 15, 21; Ezek. 13:19 Rev. 18:12-
13; Matt. 23:15.)

The power differential is especially true of anyone who is weaker, but
especially those who are substantially helpless, such as children, those with
mental or physical disabilities, or those otherwise vulnerable due to their
condition. Peter also notes that women in marriages are the weaker vessel,
acknowledging the power dynamic between the sexes in general (1 Peter 3:7).
Peter’s declaration is interpreted as a statement about physical strength, the
vessel being a metaphor for the human body.53 Therefore husbands, and men
in general, are cautioned: men are, in general, physically stronger than women.
This power is provided to protect and serve their sisters in Christ, not to harm.



   53
      So, Matthew Henry, who says that, “she is the weaker vessel by nature and
constitution… but in other and higher respects equal to her husband,” in his
Commentary on the Whole Bible, 1 Peter 3:7. This interpretation is confirmed by other
NT uses of the term σκεῦος that more clearly refer to the human body (2 Cor. 4:7,
Rom. 9:22, 1 Thess. 4:4). John Calvin affirms this in his comments on 1 Thessalonians
4:4, “As for the expression, that every one of you may know to possess his vessel,
some explain it as referring to a wife, as though it had been said, ‘Let husbands dwell
with their wives in all chastity.’ As, however, he addresses husbands and wives
indiscriminately, there can be no doubt that he employs the term vessel to mean body,”
John Calvin, Commentaries on The Epistle of Paul to the Philippians, Colossians, and
Thessalonians.
                                         1006
                                   APPENDIX V



Some persons are vulnerable due to their position in relation to church power,
especially in access to church courts. Because the PCA ordains only men to
the office of presbyter, officers in the church must take special care to make
sure all laypeople, women in particular, have proper access and representation
in ecclesiastical courts. Church officers are instructed to ensure all parties in
judicial process have access to the rules of discipline and can obtain good
representation (BCO 32-3).

In Revelation 18:12-13, souls are equated to precious goods—valuable
individuals that ought to be treasured and kept safe. Abuse is a sin that damages
the soul. The Pauline passages cited above discuss the destruction of those for
whom Christ died. Modern scientific discoveries have shown us that abuse
trauma causes lasting damage to the psyche.54 The biblical word for psyche is
soul. This confessional clause, “the souls of them,” with its accompanying
Scripture citations, therefore, gives the theological basis for abuse-related
trauma and speaks to the evil nature of causing damage to another image-
bearer’s soul.55

“Break many commandments, contain in it many sins”

(Scriptures cited: Col. 3:5; 1 Tim. 6:10; Prov. 5:8-12; 6:32-33; Josh. 7:21.)

The damage of abuse is the result when multiple sins are committed. When a
person verbally abuses, they are transgressing the sixth and ninth
commandments. If it is a husband of a wife, the fifth and seventh
commandments are transgressed as well. All abuse involves deception (a
violation of the ninth commandment): the abuser’s self-deceit, the deception
of the victim, and the deception of the community. The sin of abuse is deemed
more heinous because of this multiplicity of transgressions.

“Promises, vows, covenants, and engagements to God or men”


   54
       H. D. Gingrich and F. C. Gingrich. Treating Trauma in Christian Counseling
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2017), 55-77.
    55
       While the Bible does not use the terms “psychological damage” or “trauma,” it
does refer to the damage of souls. The Greek word ψυχή is the word used in the Bible
for “soul.” This word also serves as the etymological root for the word “psychology.”
Revelation 18:12-13 shows that the soul has great value, the implication being that
great care should be taken not to damage souls. Further, Proverbs 14:30 and Habakkuk
3:16 speak of “bone rot” and Psalm 31:10 speaks of “bones wasting away.” These
three references seem to be metaphors for harm being done to the soul.
                                        1007
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



(Scriptures cited: Ps. 78:34-37; Jer. 2:20; Jer. 42:5-6, 20-21; Eccl. 5:4-6; Prov.
20:25; Lev. 26:25; Prov. 2:17; Ezek. 17:18-19.)

The WLC considers sin that transgresses vows and promises as base. This
includes spouses who make vows to one another, parents who make vows to
their children, church officers who make vows to the flock, and congregations
who make vows to their pastors, elders, and deacons. Whenever these vows
and promises are broken, it causes great damage. Thus, when a parent abuses
a child, great damage is done due to not only the transgression of so many
commandments, but also due to the breach of the covenant bond between them.
When a husband abuses his wife, great damage is done. When a pastor or elder,
who swore to feed the sheep for whom Christ died, abuses his own sheep, it is
grievous. This is why Jesus says it would be better to have a great millstone
hung around their necks and be thrown into the depths of the sea (Matt. 18:6,
Mark 9:42, Luke 17:2). The implication is that the dread Judge of all will have
His vengeance (Rom. 12:19).

“If done . . . frequently, [or] with . . . continuance”

(Scriptures cited: Num. 14:22; Isa. 57:17.)

Non-physical forms of abuse are established by the evidence of a pattern of
sinful behavior. The catechism validates this framework with the statement
that sins committed frequently or with continuance are more heinous.
 “Relapsing after repentance”

(Scriptures cited: Jer. 34:8-11; 2 Peter 2:20-22.)

One of the factors for judging if repentance is genuine, and if restoration of an
abuser is warranted, is when they demonstrate fruits in keeping with
repentance. Paul writes,

For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation without regret,
whereas worldly grief produces death. For see what earnestness this godly
grief has produced in you, but also what eagerness to clear yourselves, what
indignation, what fear, what longing, what zeal, what punishment! At every
point you have proved yourselves innocent in the matter (2 Cor. 7:10-11).56




   56
        See Attachment 10: Repentance for an extended exegesis of this passage.
                                         1008
                                   APPENDIX V



Apologizing is certainly expected when a sin is committed against another.
However, simply stating “I’m sorry” is inadequate considering the substance
found in Paul’s letter. Is the abuser earnest for God to produce a grief in them
that is eager to deal with their sin? Are they grieving how they’ve sinned
against God (primarily) and their fellow image-bearer (specifically)? Do they
recognize the full impact of their sin on the victim? Are they submitting to the
process of repentance? What does restitution look like, and do they desire to
do whatever it takes to make the wrong right?

Or, conversely, is the abuser experiencing worldly sorrow? Do they regret their
actions, but grieve simply the consequences? Are they upset about what they
did or that they got caught? Repentance is a work of the Holy Spirit. A person
who diligently deals with their sin positions themselves humbly before their
Lord and pleads for Him to work restoration—restoration to a right
relationship with Him. Discerning repentance is difficult especially when the
presenting sin involves manipulation and deception, which are key features of
a heart that oppresses.57

The WLC on the Ten Commandments

Having discussed the aggravating factors that cause sins to become more
heinous, we now move to the Catechism content of the Ten Commandments.
While the transgression of any commandment is grievous, the locus of our
analysis will be focused on the fifth, sixth, seventh, and ninth commandments
as they relate particularly to abuse.

The Fifth Commandment

“Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God giveth thee” (Ex. 20:12).

Q. 129 What is required of superiors towards their inferiors?
A. It is required of superiors according to that power they receive from God,
and that relation wherein they stand, to love, pray for, and bless their inferiors,
to instruct, counsel, and admonish them; countenancing, commending, and
rewarding such as do well; and discountenancing, reproving, and chastising
such as do ill; protecting, and providing for them all things necessary for soul
and body: and by grave, wise, holy, and exemplary carriage, to procure glory

   57
      See Attachment 10 on Repentance. Also see this resource to help you discern if
what you are seeing is godly repentance. https://www.ccef.org/jbc_article/how-to-
discern-true-repentance-when-serious-sin-has-occurred/
                                       1009
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



to God, honour to themselves, and so to preserve that authority which God
hath put upon them.

Authority, according to the catechism answer, is the power a “superior”
receives from God. God gifts that power to benefit those under authority. This
includes (but is not limited to) loving, blessing, praying for, instructing,
counseling, and admonishing. Those with positions of authority reward and
commend those under their care when they do right, as well as discountenance,
reprove, and chastise when they do wrong. Superiors are also to protect and
provide for all things necessary for soul and body. In accomplishing these
goals, those in authority procure glory for God and preserve the authority God
gives. Practically, the catechism states this is applied through instruction,
counsel, protection, and provision.

As this relates to abuse, it is the duty of the elders to instruct and counsel their
congregations according to God’s Word (Deut. 6:6-7), the confessional
standards, and common grace informed resources. Superiors thereby provide
members with the tools necessary to care for one another. Learning what the
Bible teaches regarding abuse and those who abuse, helps create a culture in
the church that quickly identifies and thereby prevents sinful abusive
behaviors.

It is also the duty of elders to protect and provide. Churches protect their
members with policies that take into consideration the most vulnerable in the
congregation.58 Leaders —to the best of their ability—provide both children
and adults, every age group and gender, with the tools necessary for abuse
prevention.

Two areas in the catechism answer address response to abuse:

    •    The duty to deal with those who sin. The catechism states church
         leaders are to “discountenance.” “Discountenance” is defined as to



   58
      Examples might be Presbyteries and Sessions enacting policies to hire qualified
independent parties to investigate claims of abuse, policies detailing appropriate
workplace interactions to inform and protect against harassment, Presbyteries enacting
policies to require background checks and abuse training for all ordinands and
transfers, and policies to protect whistleblowers against retribution. The basic idea is
that the job of prevention is not completed once a Sunday morning child protection
policy has been adopted.
                                         1010
                                     APPENDIX V



         “discourage by evidence of disapproval.”59 This evidence is not only
         exhibited toward the offender, but also witnessed by any victims and
         the church-at-large. To discountenance is to “call out and thwart”
         those who do wrong. Calling out the evildoer helps prevent the evil
         from continuing. It also acts as a deterrent, warning others who might
         do similarly. Discretion and wisdom are necessary in doing this, as
         instructed in the BCO and in Holy Scripture (BCO 32-1, Gal. 6:1). Yet
         elders should not shy away from the duty of discountenancing the evil
         of abuse in our midst out of the desire to protect reputations. The
         catechism directly charges us to discountenance such evil.
    •    The charge for elders to “reprove and chastise.” This speaks directly
         to the infliction of censures as found in BCO 36. Note, according to
         the BCO, censures may be inflicted on those who are repentant (BCO
         38-1). Indeed, when a great evil has occurred, it is the duty of the
         courts of the church to inflict censures in order to operate as a means
         to reclaim the offender, deliver the church from scandal, and inspire
         fear by example (BCO 30-4). Discretion and wisdom are necessary in
         making censures known. Protecting any victims is the primary
         concern.

The second duty of superiors is to provide for those under their authority. This
instructs parents to provide for their children. To fail to provide for a child’s
needs is child neglect. This neglect can also manifest as spousal neglect and/or
economic abuse. The standard in the catechism is the duty of familial superiors
to provide for the needs of those under their care. Since the catechism notes
that provision includes “all things necessary for soul and body,” spiritual harm
by the misuse of power falls under this clause.

The final duty of superiors is to bless inferiors. As it relates to abuse, lack of
properly responding to evil when it happens is a failure to bless the vulnerable.
Lack of response, and/or a poor response, may lead to spiritual disillusionment
and perhaps the inferior departing from the church.60

    59
        Webster.com Dictionary, s.v. “discountenance,” https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/discountenance.
    60
       One example of this is a Pew Research study on the religious “nones” that stated,
“One-in-five express an opposition to organized religion in general. This share
includes some who do not like the hierarchical nature of religious groups, several
people who think religion is too much like a business and others who mention clergy
sexual abuse scandals as reasons for their stance.” https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2016/08/24/why-americas-nones-left-religion-behind/. See also this article from
The Gospel Coalition, that cites “church hurt” as a reason why many young
                                         1011
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




Scripture References for WLC 129

The Scripture references of the WLC are a valuable tool to understand the
biblical basis of the sin of abuse and further elucidate the thinking of the
divines. Below are some of the relevant Scriptures.


The Confessional Definition of Abuse

    ●   Colossians 3:19 ‒ Husbands, love your wives, and do not be harsh
        with them.
    ●   Ephesians 6:4 ‒ Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but
        bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
    ●   1 Peter 3:7 ‒ Likewise, husbands, live with your wives in an
        understanding way, showing honor to the woman as the weaker vessel,
        since they are heirs with you of the grace of life, so that your prayers
        may not be hindered.

These verses describe behaviors of harshness, provocation, and insensitivity
through words and/or actions as sinful behaviors in various relationships
(husband to wives, parents to children). All relationships struggle with these
sins. What makes the sinful behavior abusive is that it is a repeated, persistent
pattern of sin over a prolonged period that causes significant and lasting
damage. This report understands non-physical forms of abuse in this way. An
individual who perpetrates repeated, persistent sins of abuse must not be
dismissed as someone who “sometimes loses his cool.” All forms of abuse,
whether physical or non-physical, negatively impact both the inner and outer
man.

The Requirement To Report Abuse to the Civil Authorities

    ●   1 Peter 2:14 ‒ or to governors as sent by him to punish those who do
        evil and to praise those who do good.
    ●   Romans 13:4 ‒ for he is God's servant for your good. But if you do
        wrong, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For he is the
        servant of God, an avenger who carries out God's wrath on the
        wrongdoer.


evangelicals are deconstructing: https://www.thegospelcoalition.org/article/4-causes-
deconstruction/.
                                        1012
                                    APPENDIX V




These verses instruct how to deal appropriately with the evil of abuse when it
occurs. “Governors” exist in both the state and the church. When it comes to
criminal abuse, the governors of the church should submit to the laws and
authority of the state (Rom. 13:1-7). When it comes to forms of abuse that the
state does not criminalize or does not hold criminally liable, it remains the duty
of church governors to discountenance those sins.61
 Oppression as the Biblical Category for Abuse

    ●    Job 29:12-17 ‒ . . . because I delivered the poor who cried for help,
         and the fatherless who had none to help him. The blessing of him who
         was about to perish came upon me, and I caused the widow's heart to
         sing for joy. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; my justice was
         like a robe and a turban. I was eyes to the blind and feet to the lame. I
         was a father to the needy, and I searched out the cause of him whom I
         did not know. I broke the fangs of the unrighteous and made him drop
         his prey from his teeth.
    ●    Isaiah 1:17 ‒ “Learn to do good; seek justice, correct oppression; bring
         justice to the fatherless, plead the widow's cause.”

These verses speak generally to the duty of leaders to seek justice and correct
oppression. They also direct leaders to pay particular attention to those who
have less power. We are to plead the widow’s cause because she has no one to
help her. In dealing with abuse, the Scriptures call us to carefully attend to
those in the situation who have less power.

Protecting the Reputation of Church Leaders

    ●    1 Timothy 4:12 ‒ Let no one despise you for your youth, but set the
         believers an example in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity.
    ●    Titus 2:3-5 ‒ Older women likewise are to be reverent in behavior, not
         slanderers or slaves to much wine. They are to teach what is good, and
         so train the young women to love their husbands and children, to be
         self-controlled, pure, working at home, kind, and submissive to their
         own husbands, that the word of God may not be reviled. (Emphasis
         added.)


   61
      It should also be noted that many times the civil authorities will decline to
investigate a matter or prosecute the perpetrator. This is not a statement of innocence
by the magistrate and thus does not necessarily remove the responsibility of the church
courts to deal with sin.
                                         1013
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●    1 Kings 3:28 ‒ And all Israel heard of the judgment that the king had
         rendered, and they stood in awe of the king, because they perceived
         that the wisdom of God was in him to do justice.
     ● Titus 2:15 ‒ Declare these things; exhort and rebuke with all authority.
         Let no one disregard you.
These verses speak to the duty of superiors to accrue glory to God and preserve
their reputations by doing what is right. One of the qualifications for an elder
is to be thought well of by outsiders (1 Tim. 3:7). If outsiders lack respect for
the church due to its failures in both preventing and adequately responding to
abuse, leaders are those primarily responsible to seek the ways in which the
church has failed to obey God (Amos 3:2; 1 Peter 4:17).

The Sins Forbidden in the Fifth Commandment

Q. 130 What are the sins of superiors?
A. The sins of superiors are, besides the neglect of the duties required of them,
an inordinate seeking of themselves, their own glory, ease, profit, or pleasure,
commanding things unlawful, or not in the power of inferiors to perform;
counselling, encouraging, or favouring them in that which is evil; dissuading,
discouraging, or discountenancing them in that which is good; correcting them
unduly; careless exposing, or leaving them to wrong, temptation, and danger;
provoking them to wrath; or any way dishonouring themselves, or lessening
their authority, by an unjust, indiscreet, rigorous, or remiss behaviour.

In this question and answer, one instance of these sins may not constitute
abuse. It is the repeated persistent pattern of sin over a prolonged period that
causes significant and lasting harm.

“An inordinate seeking of themselves, their own glory, ease, profit, or
pleasure.”

    ●   Ezekiel 34:2-4 ‒ “Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of
        Israel; prophesy, and say to them, even to the shepherds, Thus says the
        Lord GOD: Ah, shepherds of Israel who have been feeding
        yourselves! Should not shepherds feed the sheep? You eat the fat, you
        clothe yourselves with the wool, you slaughter the fat ones, but you
        do not feed the sheep. The weak you have not strengthened, the sick
        you have not healed, the injured you have not bound up, the strayed
        you have not brought back, the lost you have not sought, and with
        force and harshness you have ruled them.”


                                      1014
                                  APPENDIX V



    ●   Philippians 2:21 ‒ For they all seek their own interests, not those of
        Jesus Christ.

The sin of “seeking of themselves,” as mentioned in this first phrase, may lead
to an incessant pattern of demand, minimization, humiliation, blame-shifting,
coercion, denial, threats, and/or treating a person like a servant. Sometimes,
this may also include stringent limits on access to financial resources. If the
self-centeredness of a husband, parent, or caregiver leads to the harm of the
family due to its severity and prolonged persistence, then it could be abuse.
This is especially true when it leads to the family’s physical or spiritual
neglect.

“Commanding things unlawful, or not in the power of inferiors to perform;
counselling [or] encouraging them in that which is evil.”62

(Scriptures cited: Dan. 3:4-6; Acts 4:17; Ex. 5:10-18; Matt. 23:4; Matt 14:8; 2
Sam. 13:28.)

This phrase speaks of when an authority figure asks or commands those under
their charge to do something illegal or immoral. Church leaders are responsible
to know what constitutes illegal behavior in their community, when, how, and
to whom to report a crime, and public resources available to both victims and
abusers. This is in addition to wise shepherding care, which has a broad,
biblical understanding of what constitutes immorality in the body of Christ.
Doctrines of suffering, submission, headship, gossip, slander, and intimacy in
marriage, are all relevant to helping congregants respond well to the sins of
abuse. It is a grievous sin when an authority figure uses his or her authority
(by force or coercion) to secure participation in sinful acts. Related to this,
there is an erroneous teaching that submission owed to the husband/father is
such that wives and children must submit even if he commands something
sinful. It has also been taught that a wife or a child cannot report the
husband/father’s (or mother’s if applicable) moral failures to the authorities
(church or civil). These are false teachings that must be suppressed.

Further, when a superior “ties up heavy burdens, hard to bear,” through
impossible demands and exacting punishments, great soul damage can be
done, and thus can be a factor in spiritual abuse or leadership abuse.63

   62
      “Favoring” is removed from this section in order to deal with it separately
below.
   63
      See Attachment 1: Definitions for meanings of these terms and Section Six:
Misuse of Spiritual Authority in this report.
                                      1015
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



“Favouring them in that which is evil”

    ●   1 Samuel 3:13 ‒ “And I declare to him that I am about to punish his
        house forever, for the iniquity that he knew, because his sons were
        blaspheming God, and he did not restrain them.”

The Scripture reference for “favoring them in that which is evil,” is Eli’s
inaction in disciplining his sons. Passive forbearance with his sons’ great evil
is what led to Israel’s downfall. We must not forebear with abusers in the
church. This is a sinful favoring of evil. Leaders should instead restrain evil by
thoroughly educating themselves and their congregations regarding the
dynamics of abuse, carefully constructing robust policies to prevent abuse, and
responding adequately when it occurs.

“Dissuading, discouraging, or discountenancing them in that which is good;
correcting them unduly”

(Scriptures cited: John 7:46-49; Col. 3:21; Ex. 5:17; 1 Peter 2:18-20; Heb.
12:10; Deut. 25:3.)

When leaders, either in the home, workplace, or church, berate or belittle those
under their care, it diminishes the image of God in man. The body and the
mind, heart, will, and emotions are all a reflection of God’s image.

Diminishing others is how abusive people manipulate to control. It is an
insidious tactic that causes significant (psychological) damage to the inner
man. Similarly, an act of discipline or correction that is not reciprocal to the
wrong committed can also be weaponized by an abuser. Patterns of devaluing
God’s image in another over a prolonged period of time results in a victim’s
inability to reason appropriately, make wise personal decisions, and/or mediate
reality. Ultimately, it diminishes their capacity to steward their God-given gifts
and glorify their Creator.

“Careless exposing, or leaving them to wrong, temptation, and danger”

    ●   Genesis 38:11 ‒ Then Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law,
        “Remain a widow in your father's house, till Shelah my son grows up”
        for he feared that he would die, like his brothers. So Tamar went and
        remained in her father's house.



                                      1016
                                    APPENDIX V



    ●    Genesis 38:26 ‒ Then Judah identified them and said, “She is more
         righteous than I, since I did not give her to my son Shelah.” And he
         did not know her again.
    ●    Acts 18:17 ‒ And they all seized Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue,
         and beat him in front of the tribunal. But Gallio paid no attention to
         any of this.

Exposing children to danger is undeniably abuse and neglect. One instance is
sufficient for identifying exposure as abuse, especially when physical harm is
involved. Even when there is no physical harm, exposure is sinful. Exposure
disrupts the bond of trust between children and their parents and causes lasting
damage. “Adverse Child Experiences” or the ACE study, meticulously
identified multiple and long-lasting effects of not only physical harm and
exposure, but also of the more overt forms of physical and sexual abuse.64
Exposure occurs also when children live in a home where substance abuse or
other dangerous and sinful behavior occur. ACEs demonstrated lasting
damage to a child’s developing brain, especially in how that person responds
to certain stimuli and social interactions. These experiences can lead to PTSD
similar to the severity soldiers experience on a battlefield.

Included in these sins of exposure is when authorities, whether civil or
ecclesiastical, require abuse victims to stay in abusive relationships. Requiring
an abused wife to reconcile with her unrepentant abuser, return to the marriage
home and bed, is careless exposing to danger. The abuser’s genuine repentance
must be observed, confirmed, and proven through the test of time [see
Attachment 10: Repentance]. It involves more than (but is not limited to)
admitting to being caught, saying “I’m sorry,” and/or pledging to work with
the Session.

Similarly, forcing children to reconcile relationally with abusive parents may
cause great harm. Care, discernment, and wisdom must be taken in these
situations.

The rules of discipline are inappropriate tools for forcing compliance of abuse
victims.




    64
       For a helpful description of adverse child experiences, see: https://www.cdc.gov
/violenceprevention/aces/index.html
                                         1017
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Careless exposure to wrong and danger also occurs when authorities in the
church fail to properly educate the congregation on issues of abuse and
institute appropriate policies for abuse prevention.

As pointed out above in the discussion of Question 129, many people are
leaving the church due, in part, to the way the church has responded to abuse.
When anyone abandons the bride of Christ for an unbiblical reason, it is sinful.
However, if authorities expose “them to temptation,” the greater sin lies with
leaders. Judah said in Genesis 38:26, “She is more righteous than I.” Jesus
likewise said, “But whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me
to sin, it would be better for him to have a great millstone fastened around his
neck and to be drowned in the depth of the sea” (Matt. 18:6).

“Provoking them to wrath”

    ●   Ephesians 6:4 ‒ Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but
        bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.

Superiors in the family may provoke those under their care by many of the
aforementioned WLC prohibitions. They might apply exacting punishments,
diminish and belittle, have unrealistic expectations, favor their own desires to
the exclusion of everyone else in the family, and/or expose them to dangerous
situations. When little ones under the authority of others have been caused to
sin, far greater sin has been done by those that have provoked them by their
abuse. Shepherds care for victims with kindness while simultaneously (justly)
punishing abusers.

This principle applies to other “superior-inferior” type relationships as well.
Abuse victims are not without sin. However, there is a significant inequality
between their sin issues and the evil of abuse. Wrath is an appropriate response
to evil. Victims must not sin in their response to the abuse, yet it is within
reason that they are very angry about the sins committed against them. This
doesn’t excuse sin. It does mean church leaders and members should patiently
shepherd the victim with care and understanding, and to never equate their
anger with the sins of their abusers.

“Or any way dishonouring themselves, or lessening their authority, by an
unjust, indiscreet, rigorous, or remiss behaviour”

    ●   Genesis 9:21 – He drank of the wine and became drunk and lay
        uncovered in his tent.
                                     1018
                                  APPENDIX V



    ●   1 Kings 12:13-16 ‒ And the king answered the people harshly, and
        forsaking the counsel that the old men had given him, he spoke to them
        according to the counsel of the young men, saying, “My father made
        your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke. My father disciplined
        you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.” So the king
        did not listen to the people, for it was a turn of affairs brought about
        by the LORD that he might fulfill his word, which the LORD spoke
        by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. And when all
        Israel saw that the king did not listen to them, the people answered the
        king, “What portion do we have in David? We have no inheritance in
        the son of Jesse. To your tents, O Israel! Look now to your own house,
        David.” So Israel went to their tents.
    ●   1 Kings 1:6 ‒ His father had never at any time displeased him by
        asking, “Why have you done thus and so?” He was also a very
        handsome man, and he was born next after Absalom.
    ●   1 Samuel 2:29-31 ‒ “Why then do you scorn My sacrifices and My
        offerings that I commanded for My dwelling, and honor your sons
        above Me by fattening yourselves on the choicest parts of every
        offering of my people Israel?” Therefore the LORD, the God of Israel,
        declares: “I promised that your house and the house of your father
        should go in and out before Me forever,” but now the LORD declares:
        “Far be it from Me, for those who honor Me I will honor, and those
        who despise Me shall be lightly esteemed. Behold, the days are
        coming when I will cut off your strength and the strength of your
        father's house, so that there will not be an old man in your house.”

When leaders, whether in the home, workplace, church, or civil government,
dishonor themselves through sinful behavior, harsh discipline, or lax
discipline, they bring dishonor on themselves and to God. Leaders in the
church should not be surprised when sheep chafe under such authority. When
those under authority are provoked to wrath, or otherwise begin to reject
authority because of the leader's sin, the greater fault lies with the leader. The
charge from the people of Israel is poignant, “Look now to your own house,
David!” Church leaders must first see to their own duties before bemoaning
and laying blame on those who are leaving the church and speaking derisively
of her. The examples of Eli and his sons, David and his sons, and Solomon in
his later reign are poignant. As the Lord promised Samuel, He will judge
church leaders for such behavior (1 Peter 4:17). The duty of those in authority
is to right the ship.



                                      1019
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The Sixth Commandment

You shall not murder (Ex. 20:13).

The locus of many sinful behaviors falling under the heading of abuse is found
in the sixth commandment. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus expands the
scope of the commandment from the unjust taking of life, to the inner working
of our hearts and to the realm of speech.

You have heard that it was said to those of old, you shall not murder; and
whoever murders will be liable to judgment. But I say to you that everyone
who is angry with his brother will be liable to judgment; whoever insults his
brother will be liable to the council; and whoever says, you fool! will be liable
to the hell of fire (Matt. 5:21-22).
The Divines follow in this vein to expound upon the sixth commandment in
all its facets:

Q. 135 What are the duties required in the sixth commandment?
A. The duties required in the sixth commandment are, all careful studies, and
lawful endeavours, to preserve the life of ourselves and others by resisting all
thoughts and purposes, subduing all passions, and avoiding all occasions,
temptations, and practices, which tend to the unjust taking away the life of any;
by just defence thereof against violence, patient bearing of the hand of God,
quietness of mind, cheerfulness of spirit; a sober use of meat, drink, physick,
sleep, labour, and recreations; by charitable thoughts, love, compassion,
meekness, gentleness, kindness; peaceable, mild and courteous speeches and
behaviour; forbearance, readiness to be reconciled, patient bearing and
forgiving of injuries, and requiting good for evil; comforting and succouring
the distressed, and protecting and defending the innocent.

There is some repetition between WLC 135 and 136, thus the overt actions that
are related to abuse will be covered below. However, there are several relevant
matters in the answer, especially as it relates to the positive duty to preserve
life and protect those under threat.

“To preserve the life of ourselves and others . . . by just defense thereof against
violence”

    ●   1 Kings 18:4 ‒ And when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the LORD,
        Obadiah took a hundred prophets and hid them by fifties in a cave and
        fed them with bread and water.
                                       1020
                                    APPENDIX V



    ●     Psalm 82:4 ‒ Rescue the weak and the needy; deliver them from the
          hand of the wicked.
    ●     Proverbs 24:11-12 ‒ Rescue those who are being taken away to death;
          hold back those who are stumbling to the slaughter. If you say,
          “Behold, we did not know this,” does not He who weighs the heart
          perceive it? Does not He who keeps watch over your soul know it, and
          will He not repay man according to his work?

(Additional Scriptures cited: Eph. 5:28-29; 1 Sam. 14:45; Jer. 38:7-13.)

Scripture is clear that preserving life includes defending victims of abuse. The
first duty is to preserve our own lives. This speaks to the obligation victims
have to protect themselves from an abuser. This may include removing herself
and her children from an abusive home, resisting living with a spouse that a
church court acknowledged has been abusive, and separating as a matter of
protection, even as others urge reconciliation with the abuser. This is the duty
to preserve life.

The second duty falls under preserving the life of others. This type of
preservation removes the victim, and any other potential victims, from the
immediate vicinity of the abuser. Any avenue that the abuser uses to further
abuse must be removed. The sixth commandment duty also includes fulfilling
the Romans 13 obligation to inform the civil authorities when the situation
requires mandated reporting (See Section Five: Child Abuse).

“Patient bearing of the hand of God”

(Scriptures cited: James 5:7-11; Heb. 12:9.)

This duty speaks to the nature of repentance. Genuine repentance patiently
bears with the consequences of one’s sin. A truly repentant abuser will
recognize the gravity of his or her sin and not force the process of
reconciliation. Rather, those truly repentant will wait patiently until the abused
are ready for relational restoration.65
Abusive church leaders should patiently bear under the hand of God and not
rush to be restored to a position of leadership. Damage done by abuse can be
severe and long lasting. Protecting survivors means continuous safeguarding
throughout the recovery process.



   65
        See Attachment 9: Forgiveness and Attachment 10: Repentance.
                                        1021
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



“Forbearance, readiness to be reconciled, patient bearing and forgiving of
injuries, and requiting good for evil”

(Scriptures cited: Matt. 5:24; Eph. 4:2; Eph. 4:32; Rom. 12:17; Rom. 12:20;
Rom. 12:21.)

Because preserving life implies patience with victims, impartiality requires a
careful examination of this seemingly opposite clause. In order to understand
how these duties work together, a biblical understanding of reconciliation and
forbearance is needed. Forgiveness is not reconciliation, and forbearance is not
antithetical to preservation.

Forgiveness

These passages show that believers must forgive one another. Forgiveness is
required by the gospel. However, the duty to preserve life requires protecting
victims from their abuser. It also requires protecting those who choose to
remain with their abuser. Protection includes trying to persuade a victim to
move to safety.

Forgiveness does not always involve relational restoration.66 When it comes to
reconciliation and forgiveness, this must be also measured against the duty to
protect. The duty that follows below states, “comfort and succor the
distressed.” If the abused person is distressed, leaders are called to continue
protecting them while they seek healing.

The catechism answer requires, “requiting good for evil.” Insisting on
accountability, justice, and rehabilitation may be the cause of an abuser truly
repenting of his or her sins and receiving eternal reward. What greater good
can be requited than salvation?

Forbearance

The duty of forbearance does not negate the duty to preserve one’s life from
violence. The duty to preserve is primary and supersedes the duty of
forbearance. The Scripture reference for forbearance is Ephesians 4:2,
“bearing with one another in love,” and the Greek word is ἀνέχω. This word
is defined as “endurance.” The context of Ephesians 4 is not intimate
relationships but the unity of the church body. Paul is asking believers to be


   66
        See Attachment 9: Forgiveness.
                                         1022
                                  APPENDIX V



patient with one another’s shortcomings in order to preserve unity and peace
in the church. He is not asking abuse victims to endure further abuse. “One
another” is plural, implying not an endurance between two persons but an
endurance between one person and the larger community. Paul is clear in his
writings that patient endurance does not mean allowing grave sins to persist,
saying, “purge the evil person from among you,”67 and, “I have handed [them]
over to Satan.”68 Moreover, the citation for Romans 12 states “repay no one
evil for evil.” Moving victims out of abusive situations is not repaying evil for
evil but protecting from further harm. Abuse is a grave sin against the image-
bearer of God. Biblical forbearance does not include remaining in abusive
situations.

Nevertheless, adults should not be moved into protective situations against
their will unless there is a grave threat of the loss of life.

“Comforting and succouring the distressed, and protecting and defending the
innocent.”

    ●   Matthew 25:35-36 ‒ “For I was hungry and you gave Me food, I was
        thirsty and you gave Me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed
        Me, I was naked and you clothed Me, I was sick and you visited Me,
        I was in prison and you came to Me.”
    ●   Proverbs 31:8-9 ‒ Open your mouth for the mute, for the rights of all
        who are destitute. Open your mouth, judge righteously, defend the
        rights of the poor and needy.

(Additional Scriptures cited: 1 Thess. 5:14; Job 31:19-20; Isa. 58:7.)

To give comfort and succor to those distressed by abuse is to protect. This
includes the provision of qualified medical care for both the wounds of the
body and the wounds of the mind. According to our own Reformed
distinctives, man consists of two parts: a body and a soul.69 Though delineated
into two, the inner and outer “designate the one spiritual substance of man . . .
(Rom. 8:10; 1 Cor. 5:5; 7:34; 2 Cor. 7:1; Eph. 2:3; Col. 2:5).”70 Both body and
soul constitute the whole man, therefore when someone experiences abuse, the
whole man is in need of care. The human mind is a mysterious example of this.

   67
      1 Corinthians 5:5.
   68
      1 Timothy 1:20.
   69
      See WLC Q. 29 and Q. 37 and Matt. 6:25; 10:28; Eccl. 12:7; and 1 Cor 5:3, 5.
   70
        L. Berkhof. Manual of Christian Doctrine (Grand Rapids, MI: WM. B.
Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1933), 121-123.
                                      1023
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



What we call the mind can in some ways be attributed to the soul. However,
we also know that the mind has a physical component.71

For many forms of abuse, including child abuse, sexual abuse, physical assault,
sexual assault, and any other abuse that causes severe psychological distress,
damage to the brain and central nervous system is significant.72 This damage
can manifest itself as PTSD, OCD, depression, anxiety, and a variety of other
disorders. Shepherds are called to care for the soul; however, wisdom directs
church leaders to partner with trained individuals with experience working
with these conditions for the purpose of comprehensive caregiving.73
Financial provision for counseling and medical treatment is considered an
appropriate restitution from the abuser to the abused (see Exodus 22). It can
also be an act of mercy for the church to assist victims with the cost of their
care. Due to privacy issues as it relates to medical and mental healthcare,
consider hiring a third-party administrator to handle reimbursements. Due to
the intimate nature of the care, the choice of a counselor belongs to the victim.
Stipulations should not be placed on the usage of funds by those granting.

The Sins Forbidden in the Sixth Commandment

The sixth commandment contains overtly sinful behaviors that can be abusive.

Q. 136 What are the sins forbidden in the sixth commandment?
A. The sins forbidden in the sixth commandment are, all taking away the life
of ourselves, or of others, except in case of publick justice, lawful war, or
necessary defence; the neglecting or withdrawing the lawful and necessary
means of preservation of life; sinful anger, hatred, envy, desire of revenge; all
excessive passions, distracting cares; immoderate use of meat, drink, labour,
and recreations; provoking words, oppression, quarrelling, striking, wounding,
and whatsoever else tends to the destruction of the life of any.

   71
       See Matthew 22:37 where Jesus substitutes mind for might, “Love the Lord your
God with all your heart and with your soul and with your mind.”
    72
       H. D. Gingrich and F. C. Gingrich. Treating Trauma in Christian Counseling
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2017), 67.
    73
       Does a psychologist need to be a Reformed Christian in order to partner in
providing care for victims? While the issue is complex, the short answer is no.
Certainly, treatment providers who are not antagonistic to Reformed beliefs, or seek
to undermine them, can be engaged. A non-Christian provider can work with a
patient’s religious beliefs and still care for them well. The key factor in identifying a
treatment provider is that the person is qualified to treat disorders related to abuse
trauma.
                                          1024
                                  APPENDIX V



“All taking away the life of ourselves, or of others”

    ●   Acts 16:28 ‒ But Paul cried with a loud voice, “Do not harm yourself,
        for we are all here.”
    ●   Genesis 9:6 ‒ “Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his
        blood be shed, for God made man in His own image.”

The foundational principle found in this commandment is that all abuse is a
taking away of life. This is why abuse is so damaging. Genesis 9:6 states that
the severity of the sin is due to the fact that great damage has been done to an
image-bearer of God. Since all human beings are made in God’s image, any
attempt to take away life is a grave sin with grave consequences.

“Withdrawing the lawful and necessary means of preservation of life”

    ●   Matthew 25:42-43 ‒ “For I was hungry and you gave Me no food, I
        was thirsty and you gave Me no drink, I was a stranger and you did
        not welcome Me, naked and you did not clothe Me, sick and in prison
        and you did not visit Me.”
    ●   James 2:15-16 ‒ If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and lacking in
        daily food, and one of you says to them, “Go in peace, be warmed and
        filled,” without giving them the things needed for the body, what good
        is that?

As seen in the duties of the fifth commandment, the sin of neglect is a form of
abuse. Here, in the sixth commandment, the sin of neglect is the taking away
of the necessary means for life. The sin of neglect applies to those in authority,
but it also applies generally to all human beings. However, only those who
have immediate responsibility for the one who is suffering are accountable.

Churches have the duty to care and provide for those who have need due to
abuse. If such persons need food, clothing, and shelter because they have fled
for their own safety, the church should attempt to provide. This seems to be
the very least that the Scriptures cited above require.

“Sinful anger, hatred, envy, desire of revenge; all excessive passions”

    ●   Matthew 5:22 ‒ “But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his
        brother will be liable to judgment; whoever insults his brother will be
        liable to the council; and whoever says, ‘You fool!’ will be liable to
        the hell of fire.”
                                      1025
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●   1 John 3:15 ‒ Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you
        know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.
    ●   Leviticus 19:17 ‒ You shall not hate your brother in your heart, but
        you shall reason frankly with your neighbor, lest you incur sin because
        of him.
    ●   Proverbs 14:30 ‒ A tranquil heart gives life to the flesh, but envy
        makes the bones rot.
    ●   Romans 12:19 ‒ Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave it to the
        wrath of God, for it is written, “Vengeance is Mine, I will repay,” says
        the Lord.
    ●   Ephesians 4:31 ‒ Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor
        and slander be put away from you, along with all malice.

The sins covered under the sixth commandment do not all lead to the literal
loss of life. The catechism does not begin with the sin of physical wounding
with an intent to kill and then move to sins of lesser severity. Instead, as in the
Sermon on the Mount, the Divines begin with the sins of the heart and move
outward. Special note is taken of the citation of Matthew 5:22 and 1 John 3:15.
Matthew 5:22 moves from the sin of the heart to verbal abuse. Jesus says that
the one who insults his brother should be subject to church discipline. Verbal
abuse is evidence of the status of the heart. John writes that the one who hates
his brother in his heart is a murderer and will not inherit eternal life. The sins
of the tongue reveal the heart. Scripture considers verbal abuse a very serious
sin. The church is called to respond to the same extent.

These sins, along with some of those that follow, serve as the confessional
basis for the existence of non-physical forms of abuse. Many people struggle
to define verbal, emotional, and/or psychological abuse because they are
difficult to prove. Indeed, victims of these forms of abuse recognize the
difficulty, often wishing their abusers would wound them physically so that
there would be evidence. Yet, because of what is shown in this catechism
answer, non-physical forms of abuse should be taken as seriously as if there
were visible bruises. These sins are a form of the taking away of life. By them
the life of an image-bearer is devalued, and great damage is done to the mind
and the soul.

Proverbs 14:30, cited here for envy, states that these non-physical sins have an
effect on the body, “rotting the bones.” This metaphorical language by
Solomon seems to acknowledge that non-physical forms of abuse can be
manifested physically in the nervous and immune systems. Our Reformed
distinctives affirm that a human being is not in essence only a soul, but a soul-

                                       1026
                                  APPENDIX V



body union, so it should not be surprising that scientists have discovered that
damage to the soul affects the body.

Finally, the reference for “sinful passions” in Ephesians 4:31 demonstrates that
passions are not only sexual in nature. They include bitterness, wrath, anger,
clamor, slander, and malice. “Sinful passions,” biblically, include verbal,
emotional, and psychological abuse.

“Distracting cares; immoderate use of meat, drink, labour, and recreations”

    ●   Matthew 6:31, 34 ‒ “Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What shall
        we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’. . .
        Therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will be
        anxious for itself. Sufficient for the day is its own trouble.”
    ●   Isaiah 5:12 ‒ They have lyre and harp, tambourine and flute and wine
        at their feasts, but they do not regard the deeds of the LORD, or see
        the work of His hands.

(Additional Scriptures cited: Luke 21:34; Rom. 13:13; Eccl. 2:22-23; 12:12)

The primary relationship of the sins mentioned in these passages is of the
sinner to himself. These sins can be classified as either contributing factors to
abuse, or tools the abuser implements. Self-harm, or the threat of self-harm, is
the ultimate form of controlling behavior. It is used to manipulate others to
speak or act a certain way. This causes grave damage to those under their
authority. Children in particular suffer severe trauma when a parent self-harms,
having no categories for how to mediate what happened, how (if) they
contributed, and/or what they could have done to prevent the circumstances.

The catechism begins with anxiety as a root cause. Anxiety is often a reason
why an abuser does what he does. Many abusers were abused themselves.
Abuse can lead to disordered desires which cause people to sin and subjugate
others. Not all abusers are evil psychopaths. Many of them abuse others out of
a need to regulate their own fears, anxieties, and other negative feelings. There
may not even be a strong volitional intent to harm others, but they continue to
do harm in pursuit of their own self regardless of the harm that this self-pursuit
does to others. Addictive behaviors such as substance abuse, workaholism, and
an immoderate lifestyle, can be factors that compound the effects of abuse.




                                      1027
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



“Provoking words”

    ●    Proverbs 15:1 ‒ A soft answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs
         up anger.
    ●    Proverbs 12:18 ‒ There is one whose rash words are like sword thrusts,
         but the tongue of the wise brings healing.

Another confessional basis for verbal abuse is causing a person to sin by using
provoking words. In the first reference from Proverbs 15, harsh words stir up
anger in the one sinned against, moving them to wrath. Under the fifth
commandment, causing someone to sin is a sin. In WLC 151, the multiplication
of sins makes a sin more heinous. Thus, when sinful speech causes another
person to sin, the sin is compounded. Also in WLC 151, power differentials
cause a sin to be even more heinous as when a superior uses provoking words
with an inferior. In Proverbs 12, verbal abuse is likened to stabbing with a
sword, a deadly weapon. Deadly weapons do grave damage. This is why Jesus
warns repeatedly: woe to those who cause “little ones” to sin (Matt. 18:6; Mark
9:42; Luke 17:2).

“Oppression”

    ●    Ezekiel 18:18 ‒ “As for his father, because he practiced extortion,
         robbed his brother, and did what is not good among his people, behold,
         he shall die for his iniquity.”
    ●    Exodus 1:14 ‒ And made their lives bitter with hard service, in mortar
         and brick, and in all kinds of work in the field. In all their work they
         ruthlessly made them work as slaves.

Oppression is the biblical word for abuse, cited here by the Divines and
appearing 116 times in the English Standard Version. The Divines cite Exodus
1:14, which states that the Egyptians made the lives of the Israelites bitter.
Verse 12 tells us that this bitterness is due to the oppression of the Israelites by
the Egyptians. The word used for oppression in verse 12 is ‫‘( ָענָה‬anah), which
means “affliction.”74 When used in the Hebrew Piel, the word often means to
afflict by mistreating, as it does here. Examples of this usage are when Sarah
mistreats Hagar, Laban charges Jacob not to oppress his daughters, and the
command in Exodus 22:21-23 not to oppress orphans and widows. In studying
these usages of the verb, we can define oppression as it is used in the Bible as

   74
      This is the standard Hebrew word used for oppression in the Old Testament,
appearing some 57 times in the Piel. (Piel is a verbal form in Hebrew that indicates
intensiveness.)
                                         1028
                                  APPENDIX V



“to afflict by mistreatment.” Anah (‫ ) ָענָה‬literally means, “to humble.” To
oppress is to cause someone to be humbled by ill-treatment. Humiliation in
this sense speaks to lasting damage: a person is brought low by mistreatment.

“Quarrelling”

    ●    Galatians 5:15 ‒ But if you bite and devour one another, watch out
         that you are not consumed by one another.
    ● Proverbs 23:29 ‒ Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has strife?
         Who has complaining? Who has wounds without cause? Who has
         redness of eyes?
Abusive relationships can be difficult to discern. Often, church leaders feel
trapped between the “he said, she said” dilemma and are unsure whom to
believe. This catechism question, along with the two verses cited, might even
be used as confessional evidence for that claim. Although victims of abuse can
be provoked to sinful responses to the oppressive behaviors against them, the
greater responsibility rests with the abuser. In the vast majority of cases, one
party has greater responsibility and has committed a more heinous sin. This is
especially true when the abuser is in authority over the abused. For increased
clarity regarding the nature of quarrels, Proverbs 23:29 suggests that asking
questions regarding the environment of the home (church, institution) can be
helpful.

“Striking, wounding, whatsoever else tends to the destruction of the life of
any”

(Scriptures cited: Num. 35:16-18, 21; Ex. 21:18-36.)

The Divines demonstrate in these verses that striking, even when it does not
result in death, is sin. Exodus 21:18-19, cited here, sheds light on this:

When men quarrel and one strikes the other with a stone or with his fist and
the man does not die but takes to his bed, then if the man rises again and walks
outdoors with his staff, he who struck him shall be clear; only he shall pay for
the loss of his time, and shall have him thoroughly healed.

This passage describes physical assault that results in the incapacitation of the
victim (he “takes to his bed”). The assault described also results in long-term
damage (walks with a cane). This passage distinguishes between manslaughter
and assault. However, the one who assaults remains liable for his sin even if
he escapes the death penalty. Other penalties that remain include restitution.
                                      1029
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The assailant is required to pay restitution to the victim for the loss of his time,
as well as pay for whatever care required to make the man whole. Presumably,
if the victim is permanently disabled, the assailant would be required to pay
more restitution. Physical abuse and assault that causes lasting damage is a
grievous sin necessitating disciplinary process. Protecting victims and
requiring restitution are appropriate responses by the church to cases of
physical assault. The same principle applies to nonphysical forms of abuse that
cause lasting damage.

The Divines conclude this answer with a catchall phrase lest implying that the
taking away of life is not limited to the examples provided. As biblical
evidence they cite an extended passage from Exodus 21. In studying this
passage, other forms of sin beyond physical abuse and assault require a
weighty response to all abuse. The text says, “But if there is harm, then you
shall pay life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burn for burn, wound for wound, stripe for stripe” (v. 24).

Consistent application of the principles gleaned from a study of the fifth and
sixth commandments exemplifies nonphysical forms of abuse as an unjust
taking away of life and is biblically and confessionally warranted.

The Seventh Commandment

You shall not commit adultery (Ex. 20:14).

The Divines’ exposition of the seventh commandment includes assault, abuse,
and harassment of a sexual nature.

Q. 139 What are the sins forbidden in the seventh commandment?
A. The sins forbidden in the seventh commandment, besides the neglect of the
duties required, are adultery, fornication, rape, incest, sodomy, and all
unnatural lusts; all unclean imaginations, thoughts, purposes, and affections;
all corrupt or filthy communications, or listening thereunto; wanton looks,
impudent or light behaviour, immodest apparel; prohibiting of lawful, and
dispensing with unlawful marriages; allowing, tolerating, keeping of stews,
and resorting to them; entangling vows of single life, undue delay of marriage;
having more wives or husbands than one at the same time; unjust divorce, or
desertion; idleness, gluttony, drunkenness, unchaste company, lascivious
songs, books, pictures, dancings, stage plays; and all other provocations to, or
acts of uncleanness, either in ourselves or others.


                                       1030
                                   APPENDIX V



“adultery, fornication, . . . lascivious songs, books, pictures, dancings, stage
plays; and all other provocations to, or acts of uncleanness, either in ourselves
or others”

(Scriptures cited: Heb. 13:4; Gal. 5:19; Eph. 5:4; Ezek. 23:14-16; Isa. 23:15-
17; Isa. 3:16; Mark 6:22; Rom. 13:13; 1 Peter 4:3; 2 Kings 9:30; Jer. 4:30;
Ezek. 23:40.)

The Westminster Standards clearly prohibit sexual activity outside of marriage
and participating in and viewing pornography. Illicit sexual behavior is a tactic
abusers use. When an abuser coerces a victim to participate in illicit activities,
their shame is overwhelming. Shame is then a powerful weapon used to
perpetuate abuse and discourage the victim from reporting to authorities.
Coercion, or forcing victims to participate in sexual activities, can also fall
under the category of sexual assault. These sins are not simply sexual
immorality but may be considered forms of abuse.

“rape”

    ●    2 Samuel 13:14 ‒ But he would not listen to her, and being stronger
         than she, he forced [oppressed] her and lay with her.

The goal of the biblical and theological introduction has been to ground an
understanding of abuse in the teachings of the Westminster Standards, the
adopted interpretation of Scripture by the Presbyterian Church in America.75
The Westminster Standards do not have a separate category for sexual abuse
outside the sin of rape.76 Rape has a technical, legal definition that excludes
many additional forms of sexual abuse. In addition, some victims of sexual
abuse may not describe what happened to them as rape. However, in terms of
our Confessional Standards and the judicial basis for prosecution of
ecclesiastical cases of sexual abuse in the PCA, other forms of sexual abuse
fall under the prohibition of rape. In other words, the Standards’ prohibition of
rape is broader than what we would commonly call rape. Without the inclusion
of sexual abuse under the confessional category for rape, there is no other clear
prohibition of sexual abuse in our confessional standards. Therefore, it is
necessary to include all forms of sexual assault and abuse under the
confessional umbrella of rape.

   75
       See Introduction: The Structure of the Ad Interim Committee Report on
Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault.
    76
       There are some sins forbidden in WLC 139 that may contribute to sexual abuse,
but they do not constitute an overarching category.
                                       1031
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The Scripture reference for rape given by the Divines is the story of Amnon’s
and his half-sister Tamar.77 The story is very clear. Amnon propositioned his
sister. She refused his proposition. Amnon forced Tamar to comply, and he
raped her. The use of force and vaginal penetration make this story a clear
instance of rape.

By analyzing the features of this story, we find that not only is rape described,
but sexual abuse in general, since many aspects of sexual abuse are present.
Amnon and Tamar were close acquaintances. He had a power dynamic over
her. He stalked her, groomed her, sexually harassed her, propositioned her, and
when she refused, he used force to initiate illicit sexual contact.78 After the
abuse occurred, he shunned her. The word used for rape here is the same
Hebrew word mentioned above for “oppression,” which is the general biblical
word for abuse. In fact, some older translations say that he “forced” her or
“humbled” her. The point is, while this is rape, it is not only rape. If there was
any other form of sexual contact in this story it would still be considered sexual
abuse.

Consent is a major part of the story of Amnon and Tamar. In verse 12, Tamar
pleads with her brother, “Do not oppress me, for such a thing is not done in

   77
       While this biblical story contains many of the aspects of sexual abuse, there is
one feature that may not occur in every instance: Tamar’s argument with and implied
struggle against Amnon. It is not a requirement for abuse to be considered abuse that
a victim must argue with and physically struggle against their abuser. Of note here is
that the passage does not explicitly record her crying out. The Mosaic Law required
betrothed virgins to cry out if they are being raped; however, Tamar was not betrothed,
so the same stipulations did not strictly apply. Nevertheless, she was in the city and in
a house where servants were located, so if she had cried out, someone may have come
to her aid. Despite the fact that she did not cry out, the Scriptures do not place any
blame on her, laying the fault solely on the evil actions of Amnon. Note also that the
Scriptures do not explicitly say that she struggled against him. It implies a struggle
when it says, “being stronger than she, he violated her and lay with her” (2 Sam.
13:14). The fact that it does not explicitly record a struggle, then makes it a feature of
the story but not a factor in consideration of whether or not something is sexual abuse.
    78
       The Hebrew word chazaq (“to be strong”) can be used in the Scriptures in a
nonphysical way. In Exodus 12:33, the Egyptians “urge” the Israelites to leave in
haste. In 2 Kings 4:8, the Shunammite “urges” Elisha to stay with her. This semantic
range opens up our understanding of Deuteronomy 22:25 and 2 Samuel 13:14 to
include forceful urging or coercion. See Katie McCoy, “God Is Not Silent: What the
Bible Teaches about Sexual Assault,” The Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission of
the Southern Baptist Convention (2017), https://erlc.com/resource-library/articles
/god-is-not-silent-what-the-bible-teaches-about-sexual-assault/.
                                          1032
                                    APPENDIX V



Israel.” The verb is in the Piel, thus a forceful affliction by mistreatment is
signified. In both the 1611 King James Version and the 1599 Geneva Bible,
the translations the Divines used, this verb is translated “to force.” In those
translations Tamar says, “Do not force me” (v. 12). Consent is key. If she had
consented to be a willing participant, it would have been the sin of incest, not
rape.79

Since consent is a key factor in the confessional definition of rape, it follows
that any sexual activity where consent is not given, can’t be given, or consent
is impaired, falls under the umbrella of the confessional prohibition of rape.80
Impairment of consent exists in a differential of power (boss with subordinates,
pastor with parishioners), age, or state of consciousness (including a person
impaired by a substance). If two peers attend a party and one of them becomes
intoxicated, it is considered sexual assault if the other takes advantage of the
impaired person. The requirement for consent also extends to the marriage bed.
If an intimate partner does not consent and the other persists and engages in
sexual relations, it is considered sexual assault.

With regard to child sexual abuse, whenever an adult sexually abuses a minor,
it falls under the confessional umbrella of rape because children are unable to
consent to sexual activity with adults.

Often, abuse in the church involves young adults and/or teenagers. Young
adult or youth leaders possess a power dynamic with younger teens that
impairs the ability to consent. This raises the heinousness of the sin beyond
sexual immorality to abuse.

The sins WLC 139 includes in rape are recognized as crimes in many legal
jurisdictions. Presbyteries and Sessions must understand mandatory reporting
laws applicable to their locale. When a crime has been committed, Romans 13
takes precedence over Matthew 18. Adult victims must be consulted before
reporting their abuse to authorities. No report should be made against an adult
victim’s consent.81 However, if the civil authorities decline to investigate or
prosecute, the church is responsible to pursue the matter within the

   79
       Note here that we use the phrase, “consenting to be a willing participant.” A
person may be berated and coerced into giving in, but that may not be the same as
willing consent. Wisdom is required in discerning the difference.
    80
       This is not to say that all sexual abuse is the same in degree of severity. WLC
151 still applies here.
    81
       The exception to this is if the adult was a minor when the abuse occurred and
there is reason to suspect that ongoing abuse may be occurring involving other minors.
                                        1033
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



ecclesiastical court. The duties outlined for responding to abuse remain in
effect. (See “Reporting” in each section of this report for further information
on reporting different forms of abuse.)

“All corrupt or filthy communications, or listening thereunto; wanton looks”

(Scriptures cited: Eph. 5:3-4; Prov. 7:5, 21-22; Isa. 3:16; 2 Peter 2:14.)

Scripture forbids all crude or lascivious speech and behavior. This type of
speech and/or behavior toward others sinfully diminishes image-bearers. If
there is any form of power differential in the relationship, it is classified as
sexual harassment. It is also considered harassment in the absence of a power
differential if the comments are unwanted and are severe or repeated. If a
pattern of such harassment persists over a prolonged period, it can be classified
as abusive. All forms of sexual harassment are subject to the discipline of the
church. (See considerations of WLC 151 above for further discussion on power
differentials.)

“Impudent or light behaviour, immodest apparel . . . gluttony, drunkenness,
unchaste company, lascivious songs, books, pictures, dancings, stage plays;
and all other provocations to, or acts of uncleanness, either in ourselves or
others”

(Scriptures cited: Prov. 7:10, 13; Ezek. 16:49; Prov. 23:30-33; Gen. 39:10;
Eph. 5:4; Ezek. 23:14-16; Isa. 23:15-17; Isa. 3:16; Mark 6:22; Rom. 13:13; 1
Peter 4:3; 2 Kings 9:30; Jer. 4:30; Ezek. 23:40.)

Do these passages indicate victims contribute to their abuse?

First, no person is without sin. But does sin contribute or lead to abuse or
assault? Abuse or assault is never stipulated as a form of punishment in the
Scriptures, speaking to the fact that no one deserves abuse or assault.
Attributing a victim’s sin, appearance, friends, and/or recreations to an assault
minimizes the sin of the abuser. Scripture is clear: we cannot make someone
sin; people choose to sin (James 1:14). Predators have been known to
intentionally pursue these vulnerabilities because the target is easier prey and
society will attribute at least part of the blame on them. In the church, we must
judge justly with clear eyes. All sin is not equal. God deals with sin
proportionate to the evil that has been committed and directly with the heart
that commits it. A victim’s sin can be addressed outside of the abusive
situation, giving adequate time and resources to heal from the effects of the
                                      1034
                                     APPENDIX V



more heinous crime committed against them. However, care must be taken to
express that the abuse is not their fault.

Second, these verses regarding the seductress, along with many similar
passages, characterize the danger of idolatry in general, or of the people of
Israel, the bride of Yahweh. This can be seen in many of the Proverbs, the
Prophets (especially Ezekiel), and Revelation. Throughout the Prophets,
enemy cities are also personified as women. The use of this analogy is not
necessarily meant to emphasize the danger women pose to men. In reality, the
majority of instances of sinful seduction recorded in the Bible are of men
taking advantage of women (Gen. 19:4-5; Gen. 34, 38; Judg. 19:22-25; 2 Sam.
11; 2 Sam. 13).

Blaming the victim is one of the main reasons wounded people don’t come
forward. Shepherds help victims report by listening, hearing them, and
reserving judgment.

“Unjust divorce, or desertion”

       ●   Malachi 2:16 ‒ “For the man who does not love his wife but divorces
           her,” says the LORD, the God of Israel, “covers his garment with
           violence,” says the LORD of hosts. So guard yourselves in your spirit,
           and do not be faithless.
       ●   Matthew 5:32 ‒ But I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife,
           except on the ground of sexual immorality, makes her commit
           adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
       ●   1 Corinthians 7:12-13 ‒ To the rest I say (I, not the Lord) that if any
           brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with
           him, he should not divorce her. If any woman has a husband who is an
           unbeliever, and he consents to live with her, she should not divorce
           him.

The 20th General Assembly of the PCA produced a study Report on Divorce
and Remarriage.82 The committee concluded that grounds for divorce is
porneia.83 It also acknowledged the possibility of a believer divorcing an
unbelieving spouse because of desertion.84 The report states that in a case when

   82
        This report is found in the Minutes of the 20th General Assembly (1992), 513-
636.
   83
      Minutes of the 20th General Assembly (Atlanta: Stated Clerk of the General
Assembly, 1992), 633-635.
   84
      Ibid, 634-635.
                                         1035
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



“words and actions on the part of one spouse that threatens the life of the other
spouse and/or children, that the one(s) threatened should be counseled by the
Session, or representative thereof, to remove themselves from the threatening
situation.”85 After those threatened are protected and moved to safety, “the
Session should investigate, whether these words and actions are in effect
breaking the one-flesh relationship by ‘hating’ the abused spouse and not
‘nourishing and cherishing’ this one (Eph. 5:28-29). . . .When it is determined
by the Session that the abuser does not appear to them to be Christian and the
abuse continues,” 86 the church court should excommunicate the abuser. After
this, the believing spouse may seek a divorce in the civil courts.87 In response
to this report, the 20th General Assembly adopted the following recommendations
(see Minutes of the 20th General Assembly, pp. 59-60.):

    ●    When an unbeliever separates from the marriage relationship with a
         believer, the believer is free from that marriage and free to remarry but
         only in the Lord (1 Cor. 7:15, 39) [Recommendation 2.f].
    ●    The believer in the aforementioned case is free to make the biblical
         divorce legal in the eyes of the state [Recommendation 2.h].
    ●    Under extreme circumstances, a Session following the BCO may
         properly judge that such desertion (separation) has occurred, even
         though the deserting spouse is still physically present in the home
         (“desertion” being viewed in the sense understood in the study report
         on divorce, Chapter 2, Section II.E.4.) [Recommendation 2.g].

Section II.E.4 of the report begins by saying:

“. . .We must be careful not to open the floodgate of excuses. On the other
hand, we need to recognize the reality of the ‘separation.’ We should allow
sessions the liberty to discern with much prayer what would be the proper
response in particular circumstance.

Several considerations incline us to agree with those of our authorities who
have maintained that desertion can occur as well by the imposition of
intolerable conditions as by departure itself. We are struck by the fact that,
taking
Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7 together, it appears that the Lord concedes the
necessity of the abolition of marriage in certain cases precisely so as to protect
a blameless spouse from intolerable conditions. Further, taking into account

   85
      Ibid.
   86
      Ibid.
   87
      Ibid.
                                       1036
                                   APPENDIX V



both the general principles of biblical ethics and the Scripture's characteristic
manner of ethical instruction, viz. the statement of commandments in a general
form to which is added case law sufficient to indicate the manner of
application, it seems to us that those Reformed authorities are correct who have
argued that sins which are tantamount in extremity and consequence to actual
desertion should be understood to produce similar eventualities (cf. Larger
Catechism, Q. 99, A. 6).

What is more, a husband's violence, particularly to the degree that it endangers
his wife's safety, if unremedied, seems to us, by any application of Biblical
norms, to be as much a ruination of the marriage in fact as adultery or actual
departure. This is so precisely because his violence separates them, either by
her forced withdrawal from the home or by the profound cleavage between
them which the violence produces, as surely as would his own departure, and
is thus an expression of his unwillingness―to consent to live with her in
marriage (1 Cor. 7:12-13; Eph. 5:28-29). Further, insofar as the “passivity” of
the blameless spouse is an important prerequisite in Paul‘s permission of the
dissolution of marriage on account of desertion, it seems right to note that in
the case of physical abuse, for example, the blameless spouse is similarly
victimized.”88

In Appendix 1 of the report, an ad hoc committee of Philadelphia Presbytery
formed and was chaired by Rev. Dr. William S. Barker.89 Dr. Barker is the
former Dean of Westminster Seminary, Philadelphia, President of Covenant
Seminary, St. Louis, and the Moderator of the 22nd General Assembly of the
PCA. In the ad hoc committee analysis of the Westminster Divines’ allowance
for divorce due to abuse, the report concluded:

. . . When physical abuse is occurring in a marriage, the church must deal with
a situation which, as the Puritans saw, is contrary to God’s purpose for
marriage. A temporary separation may be necessary for safety, which the
church may need to facilitate, and the abusing partner should be disciplined,

   88
      Ibid., 562-563.
   89
      Ibid., 607-621. In this analysis the committee leaned heavily upon the work of
Dr. David C. Jones, erstwhile professor of ethics at Covenant Seminary, and member
of several PCA GA study committees. See also David C. Jones, “The Westminster
Confession on Divorce and Remarriage,” Presbyterion XVI, 1 (Spring 1990), 17-40.
    The complete report as well as other PCA documents on divorce and remarriage
can be found in What God Has Joined Together: The PCA Papers on Divorce and
Remarriage (Lawrenceville, GA: PCA Administrative Committee and Committee on
Discipleship Ministries, 2021).
                                       1037
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



with helpful counsel but eventually to the point of excommunication if there
is no repentance in deed as well as in word. The situation is complicated in our
cultural setting when the marriage partner is not a member of a church, or is a
member of some other church; nevertheless, discipline must be attempted.
Only after a suitable length of time and a sufficient process of church discipline
should a divorce be granted for such a desertion of one’s marriage partner and
the marriage covenant. (This is essentially the conclusion reached by David D.
Prescott in The Problem of Wife Abuse: Wife Abuse and Pastoral Counseling,
Westminster Theological Seminary D.Min. project, 1991; cf. pp. 212-221 on
“Divorce: Is It a Possibility?”)

In its understanding of the Bible’s teaching on divorce as “nothing but adultery
or such willful desertion as can no way be remedied by the Church or civil
magistrate is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage,”90 the
Westminster Assembly was seeking to steer the Scriptural path between two
demonstrable extremes91 and in the process uphold God' s high ideal for
marriage. On the one hand, this ruled out the Roman Catholic concept of no
divorce, allowing divorce for adultery and under certain circumstances
desertion. On the other hand, it ruled out divorce for incompatibility as some
such as Milton were advocating. Physical abuse of a spouse was seen as
contrary to the biblical purpose for marriage and would thus be grounds for
church discipline and could, if it led to prolonged separation without remedy,
become a cause for dissolution of a marriage. Such circumstantial details can
be handled only by a body of elders cognizant of and close to the situation.
Whereas proven adultery would be readily acknowledged as grounds for a
divorce, desertion on the basis of physical abuse as a cause for dissolution of
a marriage should be determined from the circumstances by the local session
or in the case of a minister by the presbytery.92

To summarize, the Westminster Confession (24:6) allows for divorce in the
case of willful desertion, and the 20th General Assembly study committee
report on divorce and remarriage allowed divorce in certain circumstances of
abuse when a spouse is living under intolerable conditions. Intolerable
conditions consist of more than physical violence on the part of the abuser. An
abuser can create intolerable living conditions without ever laying a hand on

   90
       WCF 24:6.
   91
        These extremes were the Roman Catholic position of no divorce and the
Zwinglian position that had six allowable grounds for divorce, “adultery, impotence,
willful desertion, grave incompatibility, sexually incapacitating illness, and
deception,” M20GA, 609-610.
    92
       Ibid., 620-621. Emphasis added.
                                       1038
                                    APPENDIX V



his spouse or children. The Domestic Abuse section of this report will cover
nonphysical tactics the abuser might use to create intolerable living conditions.

Secondly, the Divines’ citation of Malachi 2:16 included the phrase, “God
hates divorce.” While this was the former understanding, many scholars
understand this to be a mistranslation. Thus, the ESV translates the verse,
“When a man hates his wife and divorces . . .” This translation is supported by
both the Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate.93 Excommunication should be
avoided as a penalty for a wife who has fled her abuser. Even if it is eventually
determined she was erroneous for pursuing divorce, the primary duty of a
shepherd is a careful and prayerful approach to best address the difficulty of a
wife living in a situation that threatens her (and/or her children’s) well-being.

This report will deal with the issue of divorce in more depth in Attachment 11:
“Divorce and Abuse.” The topic of divorce in cases of domestic abuse
constitutes more study on desertion and how one should think and adjudicate
covenant breaking behavior. It must be asked, at what point is nonphysical
abuse intolerable and dangerous?

The Ninth Commandment

You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor (Ex. 20:16).

The sins of the ninth commandment that contribute to abuse have been covered
above (under the sixth commandment). This section will address three
additional items in the exposition of the ninth commandment that relate to the
investigation of abuse allegations, the response of the church to abuse, proper
repentance of an abuser, and the issue of false reports.

   93
      Please see the following essay by Covenant Seminary Old Testament Professor
C. John Collins. It is quite thorough: https://www.academia.edu/5304267
/Malachi_2_16_again_. Collins argues that the translation, “God hates divorce,” relies
on changing the vowel “pointings” of the Masoretic Text. Collins further states that
the LXX and Vulgate both testify against the KJV rendering and that Martin Luther,
John Calvin, and the 1560 Geneva Bible agree with the Vulgate in their own
translations. Therefore, the King James Version's translation of Micah 2:16 as “God
hates divorce,” was an innovation. The influence of the KJV is evident in many of our
modern translations, including the NASB and NKJV, translations used by many PCA
elders. Interestingly, as Collins points out, The Westminster Annotations and
Commentary on the Whole Bible list both translations (“God hates divorce” and “if a
man hates his wife and divorces”) as potential options and favors neither one. See also
the PCA GA AIC on Marriage and Divorce which agrees, in essence, with our
exegesis: M20GA, 207.
                                         1039
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




Q. 144 What are the duties required in the ninth commandment?
A. The duties required in the ninth commandment are, the preserving and
promoting of truth between man and man, and the good name of our
neighbour, as well as our own; appearing and standing for the truth; and from
the heart, sincerely, freely, clearly, and fully, speaking the truth, and only the
truth, in matters of judgment and justice, and in all other things whatsoever; a
charitable esteem of our neighbours; loving, desiring, and rejoicing in their
good name; sorrowing for, and covering of their infirmities; freely
acknowledging of their gifts and graces, defending their innocency; a ready
receiving of a good report, and unwillingness to admit of an evil report,
concerning them; discouraging tale-bearers, flatterers, and slanderers; love and
care of our own good name, and defending it when need requireth; keeping of
lawful promises; studying and practising of whatsoever things are true, honest,
lovely, and of good report.

“preserving and promoting of truth . . . appearing and standing for the truth .
. . in matters of judgment and justice”

    •   Zechariah 8:16 ‒ These are the things that you shall do: Speak the truth
        to one another; render in your gates judgments that are true and make
        for peace;
    •   Proverbs 31:8-9 ‒ Open your mouth for the mute, for the rights of all
        who are destitute. Open your mouth, judge righteously, defend the
        rights of the poor and needy.
    •   Joshua 7:19 ‒ Then Joshua said to Achan, “My son, give glory to the
        LORD God of Israel and give praise to Him. And tell me now what
        you have done; do not hide it from me.”
    •   Leviticus 19:15 ‒ “You shall do no injustice in court. You shall not be
        partial to the poor or defer to the great, but in righteousness shall you
        judge your neighbor.”
    •   Proverbs 14:5, 25 ‒ A faithful witness does not lie, but a false witness
        breathes out lies. A truthful witness saves lives, but one who breathes
        out lies is deceitful.

The positive duty under the ninth commandment is to preserve and promote
truth. Application of this principle results in the duty of church courts, to the
best of their ability, to discover the truth in allegations of abuse. This translates
to a duty to undertake a thorough, competent, and unbiased investigation as
demonstrated in the Scriptures cited above. Zechariah 8:16 (NAS 1995) says,
“Judge with truth.” Proverbs 31:9 (NAS 1995) instructs, “. . . judge
                                        1040
                                   APPENDIX V



righteously, and defend the rights of the poor and afflicted.” Leviticus 19:15
(NAS 1995) implores, “do no injustice in judgment.” The key to judging
righteously, as Scripture commands, is to discover the truth.

Joshua 7:19 depicts an investigation. Even after Achan was discovered by lot
to be the source of God’s judgment in the defeat at Ai, Joshua calls Achan
forward and questions him. Joshua follows up in order to fully discover the
truth. It was not enough to know Achan was guilty; the truth needed to be
discovered and disclosed.

The perniciousness of false reports is included in the discussion of WLC 145
below. While false reports are rare, the best way to protect against them is to
undertake an investigation to discover the truth.94 The question (Q. 145) below
also warns against prejudicing the truth. The best way to avoid prejudging a
matter is to engage a competent third party to perform an unbiased
investigation. The question below further warns against passing unjust
sentence. The best way to avoid passing unjust sentence is to perform a
competent and thorough investigation.

The duty to investigate is codified in the Book of Church Order (emphasis
added):

31-2. It is the duty of all church Sessions and Presbyteries to exercise care over
those subject to their authority. They shall with due diligence and great
discretion demand from such persons satisfactory explanations concerning
reports affecting their Christian character. This duty is more imperative when
those who deem themselves aggrieved by injurious reports shall ask an
investigation.

If such investigation, however originating, should result in raising a strong
presumption of the guilt of the party involved, the court shall institute process,
and shall appoint a prosecutor to prepare the indictment and to conduct the
case. This prosecutor shall be a member of the court, except that in a case
before the Session, he may be any communing member of the same
congregation with the accused.

The BCO clearly states the court’s duty when someone reports abuse: it is to
perform a thorough investigation and demand explanations concerning the


   94
      See Attachment 7: Myths about Abuse for information on the frequency of false
reports.
                                       1041
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



report. If the investigation raises a strong presumption of guilt, the court must
institute process by appointing a prosecutor and preparing an indictment. The
BCO does not prohibit a Session from enlisting the help of a third party in
performing an investigation.

Therefore, the duty of a church court is to perform thorough, competent, and
unbiased investigations in order to preserve and promote the truth and to judge
righteously. While a direct and explicit duty to engage a competent third party
is not found here, it is advised by this committee in order to best fulfill the
duties required and sins forbidden in the ninth commandment.

Q. 145 What are the sins forbidden in the ninth commandment?
A. The sins forbidden in the ninth commandment are, all prejudicing the truth,
and the good name of our neighbours, as well as our own, especially in public
judicature; giving false evidence, suborning false witnesses, wittingly
appearing and pleading for an evil cause, out-facing and overbearing the truth;
passing unjust sentence, calling evil good, and good evil; rewarding the wicked
according to the work of the righteous, and the righteous according to the work
of the wicked; forgery, concealing the truth, undue silence in a just cause, and
holding our peace when iniquity calleth for either a reproof from ourselves, or
complaint to others; speaking the truth unseasonably, or maliciously to a
wrong end, or perverting it to a wrong meaning, or in doubtful and equivocal
expressions, to the prejudice of truth or justice; speaking untruth, lying,
slandering, backbiting, detracting, tale-bearing, whispering, scoffing, reviling,
rash, harsh, and partial censuring; misconstructing intentions, words, and
actions; flattering, vain-glorious boasting, thinking or speaking too highly or
too meanly of ourselves or others; denying the gifts and graces of God;
aggravating smaller faults; hiding, excusing, or extenuating of sins, when
called to a free confession; unnecessary discovering of infirmities; raising false
rumours, receiving and countenancing evil reports, and stopping our ears
against just defence; evil suspicion; envying or grieving at the deserved credit
of any, endeavouring or desiring to impair it, rejoicing in their disgrace and
infamy; scornful contempt, fond admiration; breach of lawful promises;
neglecting such things as are of good report, and practising, or not avoiding
ourselves, or not hindering what we can in others, such things as procure an ill
name. (WLC 1:145 WCS)

“Concealing the truth, undue silence in a just cause, and holding our peace
when iniquity calleth for either a reproof from ourselves, or complaint to
others”


                                      1042
                                 APPENDIX V



    ●   Leviticus 5:1 ‒ “If anyone sins in that he hears a public adjuration to
        testify, and though he is a witness, whether he has seen or come to
        know the matter, yet does not speak, he shall bear his iniquity;”
    ●   1 Kings 1:6 ‒ His father had never at any time displeased him by
        asking, “Why have you done thus and so?” He was also a very
        handsome man, and he was born next after Absalom.

(Additional Scriptures cited: Deut. 13:8; Acts 5:3, 8-9; 2 Tim. 4:6; Lev. 19:17;
Isa. 59:4.)

This clause furthers the duties covered under the fifth commandment. Abusers
thrive on silence. Evil loves darkness. Thus, leaders should speak generally
about the issue of abuse and specifically when abuse occurs in the community.
The church or institution’s reputation is secondary to reproving and
discountenancing evil. When church leaders are not open about abuse, they
discourage members who notice problematic patterns of behavior, as well as
corroborating witnesses, from coming forward. Abuse dissipates when
brought into the light.

“Hiding, excusing, or extenuating of sins, when called to a free confession”

    ●   Proverbs 28:13 ‒ Whoever conceals his transgressions will not
        prosper, but he who confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy.
    ●   Proverbs 30:20 ‒ This is the way of an adulteress: she eats and wipes
        her mouth and says, “I have done no wrong.”
    ●   Genesis 3:12-13 ‒ The man said, “The woman whom you gave to be
        with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate.” Then the LORD God
        said to the woman, “What is this that you have done?” The woman
        said, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.”
    ●   Jeremiah 2:35 ‒ You say, “I am innocent; surely His anger has turned
        from me.” Behold, I will bring you to judgment for saying, “I have not
        sinned.”
    ●   2 Kings 5:25 ‒ He went in and stood before his master, and Elisha said
        to him, “Where have you been, Gehazi?” And he said, “Your servant
        went nowhere.”
    ●   Genesis 4:9 ‒ Then the LORD said to Cain, “Where is Abel your
        brother?” He said, “I do not know; am I my brother's keeper?”

The Scripture passages above articulate unrepentant sin. One who is truly
repentant will offer a free and full confession without hedging, hiding, or
blaming others. They will confess fully, not simply confessing to those sins
                                     1043
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



for which they have been caught. The WCF 15.5 reads, “Men ought not to
content themselves with a general repentance, but it is every man’s duty to
endeavor to repent of his particular sins particularly” (Ps. 19:13; Luke 19:8; 1
Tim. 1:13, 15).

Struggling with lust, a lack of sex, or a problem with substance abuse is not
the foundation nor rationale for abuse. These are excuses. Abuse is a grave sin,
magnified by many factors seen in the analysis of WLC 151 above. Scripture
tells us that leaders call sinners to account. They do not conceal the truth by
excusing or lessening sin. Scriptures call shepherds to protect sheep, bring evil
out from the dark, and hold offenders accountable.

 “Raising false rumours, receiving and countenancing evil reports, and
stopping our ears against just defence”

    ●    Exodus 23:1 ‒ “You shall not spread a false report. You shall not join
         hands with a wicked man to be a malicious witness.”

(Additional Scriptures cited: Prov. 29:12; Acts 7:56-57; Job 31:13-14.)

These passages affirm that false reports happen. False reporting is pernicious
and evil, as the accompanying Scripture shows. Falsely reporting abuses,
however, is rare.95 Scripture narrates one instance of a woman falsely accusing
a man of abuse (Gen. 39:14-15), yet multiple instances of men misusing
women.96 The Bible also tells us God will not be mocked (Gal. 6:7) and He
will reveal this darkness (Job 12:13-25; Dan. 2:22; 1 Cor. 4:5).

“Believe victims” is a common slogan today because of #metoo. To believe
those who report abuse does not negate exploration of the claims. For leaders
in the church, “believe victims” means taking necessary actions to protect first.
After physical safety is ensured, church courts can then discern the truth in the
allegations.

Deuteronomy 22:25-27 states:

“But if in the open country a man meets a young woman who is betrothed, and
the man seizes her and lies with her, then only the man who lay with her shall

   95
       The frequency of false reports for cases of physical and sexual abuse is estimated
to be between 2% and 10%. See Attachment 7: Myths about Abuse for information on
the frequency of false reports.
    96
       Genesis 19:4-5 34; 38; Judges 19:22-25; 2 Samuel 11; 13.
                                          1044
                                 APPENDIX V



die. But you shall do nothing to the young woman; she has committed no
offense punishable by death. For this case is like that of a man attacking and
murdering his neighbor, because he met her in the open country, and though
the betrothed young woman cried for help there was no one to rescue her.”

This passage articulates that a woman should be believed when there are no
witnesses or evidence (“out in the country”). Abuse rarely happens in the
presence of a witness. In this situation, the man is to die and “you shall do
nothing to the young woman.” This passage implies false reports of abuse are
rare. As mentioned above, the best way to fulfill the duty to defend against
false reports is to engage a qualified third party to investigate.

Conclusion

The purpose of this biblical and confessional introduction has been twofold.
First was to demonstrate that since PCA elders are bound by oath to the ethical
teachings of the Westminster Standards, it follows that they are bound by oath
to whatever the Standards teach concerning abuse. Second was to expound
what the Westminster Standards teach concerning abuse.

The Westminster Larger Catechism’s exposition of the Ten Commandments
is a valuable resource for guiding the ethics of the church. Specifically, the
Divines’ thorough biblical study provides a powerful set of tools for
understanding abuse from a biblical and confessional perspective. This study
grounds our understanding of abuse in the Holy Scriptures and God’s heart for
victims. His desire is that we discountenance evil by bringing it into the light
of day.

Here are the key takeaways from this biblical and confessional study of abuse:

1. The existence of power differentials is demonstrated by the Standards,
factoring in what is considered abuse and increasing the severity of the damage
done;
2. The categories of abuse discussed in this report—physical, sexual,
spiritual, and psychological—all have strong biblical support;
3. Church leaders have a duty to educate their people on the issues of abuse
and to develop robust protection and prevention policies;
4. Church leaders have a duty to respond well to abuse by protecting victims,
undertaking a competent, unbiased investigation, discountenancing evil, and
providing patient care for those affected; and


                                     1045
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



5. Though an explicit duty cannot be located in the Standards, an
independent, third party investigation is advisable in order to discover the
truth.

The goal of the Introduction was to present the confessional case for
responding to abuse. The remainder of this report will describe what a practical
response involves. Sections Two through Six may not read like a typical PCA
study report. This is because they will begin with the assumption of the biblical
and theological understanding of abuse presented in Section One and proceed
to a practical development of the biblical and theological content in
implementable ways. To put it another way, the introduction has attempted to
establish the “why”; the remaining material will answer the “what” and the
“how.”




                                      1046
                                      APPENDIX V



SECTION TWO: DOMESTIC ABUSE

1. Summary Description of Domestic Abuse

Domestic abuse97 can be defined as a form of oppression in which one spouse
controls and dominates the other through a pattern of coercive, controlling, and
punishing behaviors.98 In domestic abuse,99 power, authority, and strength are
used selfishly against another rather than for their flourishing. Abuse comes
from a deceitful and desperately wicked heart. Domestic abuse is a violation
of the marital covenant that destroys the safety and stability of every member
of the family and corrupts the body of Christ.




   97
       “First, we must remember that none of our English words are biblical words.
That is, none appear in the inspired, original Greek text. We use the words we use
because of editorial decisions. "Oppression" is used, "abuse" is not. Why? Because
that's what's been chosen. Second, we have to remember that being "biblical" is not
restricted to word choice. In other words, we want to look on the conceptual level. The
definitions of abuse offered by Langberg, Moles, Pierre, Wilson, and Strickland all
describe evils mentioned within the Bible. Third, we are very comfortable with extra
biblical language being used to describe specific biblical concepts. Trinity as opposed
to saying "God the Father, God the Son, God the Spirit" each time. Or "covenant of
redemption" or "evangelism" or "church membership." Fourth, extrabiblical words
help us by being specific. Many of the actions and attitudes that comprise abuse can
also be done in non-abusive ways. There's a difference between an argument that gets
out of hand once and a pattern of marital violence. Using words like "abuse" gives us
the ability to distinguish between systemic evil in a marriage or other relationship
where there is the exploitation of a spouse versus just the common experience of two
sinners living together. The label "biblical" is a powerful label. Biblical wording isn't
just wording found in the Bible. It's wording that captures the teaching is [of] the Bible.
And for that, extra biblical words are often tremendously helpful as we nuance the
ways human beings sin against one another.” Dr. Nathanael Brooks, Assistant
Professor of Christian Counseling, Reformed Theological Seminary, Charlotte, North
Carolina. Co-Author, Help! Our Sex Life Is Troubled by Past Abuse.
https://twitter.com/natejbrooks/status/1438835573268041729 (Accessed September
2021).
    98
       Darby A. Strickland, Is It Abuse? A Biblical Guide to Identifying Domestic Abuse
and Helping Victims (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2020), 24.
    99
       In this section, terms such as domestic abuse, violence, intimate partner violence,
IVP, and oppression may be used interchangeably. Please refer to Attachment 1:
Definitions for specific definitions.
                                           1047
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



At least ten million men and women suffer from domestic abuse each year.100
As many as twenty people are assaulted by their partners every minute.101 Up
to 85% of the victims of domestic abuse are women and/or young girls, while
2% are men.102 One hundred thirty-seven women are killed each day by acts
of familial violence.103 Statistically, there is no difference between the general
and Christian populations.104 Abusers exist in pulpits, pews, seminaries, and
on the boards and committees of every denomination, including the
Presbyterian Church in America.

Although men and women experience domestic abuse differently, every
abuser misuses their power and control. Because most victims are women, this
section will speak of abusers as men. [See Section Three of this report,
“Women Who Abuse,” for characteristics of women who abuse.]

2. Expressing God’s Heart

The biblical category for understanding all types of abuse is oppression. The
Hebrew word most often translated “oppress” (‫ )לָחַ ץ‬means to squeeze, press,
or crush.105 The English word “oppress” means “to crush or burden by the
abuse of power or authority.”106 This is the essence of abuse. An abuser uses
superior size, strength, and/or authority to crush a victim. A power imbalance
exists in all forms of oppression. One person or group dominates and controls
the other. Ecclesiastes 4:1 captures this so well: “Again I saw all the
oppressions that are done under the sun. And behold, the tears of the oppressed,

   100
         “20 Alarming Domestic Violence Statistics for 2018,” Social Solutions,
    https://www.socialsolutions.com/blog/domestic-violence-statistics-2018/.
    101
         Rachel L. Snyder, No Visible Bruises: What We Don’t Know About Domestic
Violence Can Kill Us (London, UK: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2019), 6.
    102
          Ibid, and Deanna Pan, “BC Suicide Case Puts Focus on Controversial
Issue: Intimate Partner Abuse by Women,” Boston Globe, 21 November,
2019, https://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2019/11/21/suicide-case-puts-focus-on-
controversial-issue-intimate-partner-abuse-
women/MJG83GJOZCgWslHmn7xIYK/story.html.
    103
         This number does not include men or children. Ibid, 5.
    104
        Diane Langberg, Suffering and the Heart of God: How Trauma Destroys and
Christ Restores. 1st edition. (Greensboro, NC: New Growth Press, 2015), 254.
    105
         Francis Brown, et al., The Brown-Driver-Briggs Hebrew and English Lexicon
(Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 2007), 267; Ignatius Swart, “‫לָחַ ץ‬,” in New
International Dictionary of Old Testament Theology & Exegesis, ed. Willem A.
VanGemeren (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1997), 2:792-793.
    106
        “Oppress,”Merriam-Webster.com,
https://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/oppress.
                                      1048
                                  APPENDIX V



and they had no one to comfort them! On the side of their oppressors there was
power, and there was no one to comfort them.”

In an oppressive marriage, the husband twists his authority as the head. Instead
of serving his wife and promoting her well-being, he uses authority to crush
and oppress. In Psalm 55:20, David writes, “My companion stretched out his
hand against his friends; he violated his covenant.” Domestic abuse, like the
relationship David speaks of, occurs in the context of a covenant—the
marriage covenant. This type of abuse is particularly insidious because the
victim is oppressed by a partner in life who is supposed to love, cherish, and
protect. Psalm 55:12-13 captures this sense of betrayal: For it is not an enemy
who taunts me—then I could bear it; it is not an adversary who deals insolently
with me—then I could hide from him. But it is you, a man, my equal, my
companion, my familiar friend.

God responds decisively to abuse, “The LORD is a refuge for the oppressed,
a stronghold in times of trouble” (Ps. 9:9). He provides protection for victims
and prioritizes their safety. In surveying the totality of God’s response to
oppression, an important pattern emerges. In the Bible, God is always on the
side of the oppressed.107 He defends the weak against the strong. God hears the
cries of the oppressed and acknowledges the terrible evil.

God’s response to oppression is seen most clearly in His two great acts of
redemption: the exodus and the life and death of Jesus Christ. In the exodus,
the Lord redeemed His people from oppression with a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm (Deut. 26:6-8). In Christ’s condescension, He redeemed the
entire created order from the effects of the Fall, including oppression. God
entered into human suffering and sacrificed Himself to redeem it.

3. Recognition

Women in the church tend to consult other Christian women and/or their
pastors when they experience difficulty in the home. Therefore, church
members and leaders, especially teaching and ruling elders, are wise to educate
themselves regarding the dynamics of domestic abuse, the damage it causes,
and the necessary interventions.




    107
        Brenda Branson and Paula J. Silva, Violence Among Us: Ministry to Families
in Crisis (Valley Forge, PA, Judson Press, 2007), 106.
                                      1049
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Abuse is primarily idolatry. Scripture teaches that all behavior flows from the
desires of the heart. Jesus says in Mark 7:21-23, “For from within, out of the
heart of man, come evil thoughts, sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery,
coveting, wickedness, deceit, sensuality, envy, slander, pride, foolishness. All
these evil things come from within, and they defile a person.” To understand
the actions of an abusive person we must understand the idolatry which fuels
the abuse.

There are three idols which fuel domestic abuse.

        1. The desire for power and control,
        2. The abuser’s sense of entitlement, and
        3. The desire to be God.

The Desire for Power and Control

To sinfully dominate another human being is antithetical to God’s original design.
In Genesis 1, Adam and Eve are tasked with ruling and subduing the earth and
its creatures. They are called to be His representatives on earth and to rule
creation as His viceroys.108 God did not direct them to rule and subdue each
other.

God’s original design for marriage was for ruling and subduing to be
accomplished by both the man and woman working together as a team. The
power God gave Adam and Eve to carry out the creation mandate was designed
to bless each other as they enjoyed the fruit of a subdued and nurtured earth.
Adam and Eve ignored God and His governance and, instead, put themselves
in the place of power. Marriages characterized by power, control, and
domination are therefore a clear manifestation of disobedience to God and His
ways.

An abuser views the family as a pyramid of power. At the top of the pyramid
is the abuser. There is no room for anyone else. His sinful behaviors are
intended to control the spouse and to maintain his position. An abusive episode
occurs when the abuser perceives a threat to that position. Abuse is a form of
conditioning. The abuser maintains power over the victim by punishing
behaviors when the victim acts outside his control. Over time victims live in
fear, and this is central to the abuser’s dominance.


  108
      Gordon J. Wenham, Genesis 1-15, Word Biblical Commentary (Nashville,
TN: Thomas Nelson, 1987), 31, 33.
                                      1050
                                  APPENDIX V



The Abuser’s Sense of Entitlement

Jesus prescribes the ideal mindset for a leader in Mark 10:43-45: “But whoever
would be great among you must be your servant, and whoever would be first
among you must be slave of all. For even the Son of Man came not to be served
but to serve, and to give His life as a ransom for many.” God calls husbands to
follow Jesus’s pattern of servant leadership by sacrificing their own desires for
their wives (cf. Eph. 5:25). All husbands fall short of this standard, but an
abuser does the exact opposite and leads from a posture of entitled superiority.

Entitlement can be described as “Selfishness at its most extreme. It is blind,
self-focused, utterly wicked at its core, and horribly destructive.”109 Abusers
believe they have a special status which provides them with exclusive rights
and privileges that do not apply to their wives.110 An abusive person feels
entitled to be the center of his spouse’s universe. If the household was a solar
system, the abuser would be the sun. Abusers expect the victim’s world to
revolve around meeting their needs. If the spouse veers off orbit, the abuser
feels entitled to exact punishing behaviors.

The Desire To Be God

An abuser’s desire is to replace God as the Lord of his home. This root desire
fuels both the idol of power and a sense of entitlement. Regarding power, an
abuser desires sovereign control over their spouse, a level of control that is
only appropriate for God. Concerning entitlement, an abuser feels entitled to
be served in a manner that only befits God. Jesus Christ should be the center
of our lives. Instead, the abuser tries to usurp Christ’s central position in the
life of his victim.

A tree analogy helps our understanding of the idolatry that leads to domestic
abuse.111 The roots are a desire to be God, which fuels everything else. The
trunk functions as the base of a tree, which is entitlement. The abuser behaves
as one who is entitled to always get what he wants. Control forms the branches
of the tree as control spreads out into multiple areas of the victim’s life.




   109
       Strickland, Is It Abuse?, 66.
   110
       Lundy Bancroft, Why Does He Do That? Inside the Minds of Angry and
Controlling Men (New York, NY: Penguin Books, 2002), 54.
   111
       Adapted from Bancroft, Why Does He Do That?, 75.
                                      1051
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




                   Power and
                    Control




                  The Idolatry of
                    an Abuser
                                        Entitlement




                                          Desire to be
                                          God




Categories of Recognition

Spousal abuse occurs in concrete behavioral patterns that can be named and
defined. Like a doctor who listens to a patient’s symptoms can correctly
diagnose disease, church leaders, counselors, and advocates who listen for
abuse patterns (symptoms) can accurately diagnose the evil of abuse. There
are five tactics employed in domestic abuse, each of which is comprised of
several behavior patterns:

        •   Emotional,
        •   Spiritual,
        •   Economic,
        •   Sexual Abuse, and
        •   Physical.112




   112
       Christiane Sanderson, Counseling Survivors of Domestic Abuse (Philadelphia,
PA: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2008), 22-26.
                                      1052
                                   APPENDIX V



A. Emotional Abuse: Any non-physical behavior designed to control
   someone through degradation, humiliation, and/or fear113

Emotional abuse includes more patterns than any other tactic. Powerful and
pervasive, emotional abuse underlies every other form of abuse. It is
comprised of, but not limited to, the following patterns of behavior:

         Verbal abuse involves, but is not limited to, the use of words to
         manipulate, discourage, humiliate, deceive, frighten, and threaten. It
         includes constant and unrelenting criticism. This is the most well-
         known pattern of emotional abuse.

         Intimidation involves, but is not limited to, controlling another person
         through the threat of physical harm.114 This includes raising the voice
         or using the body in a threatening manner. An abuser might block a
         victim from exiting the room or raise his hand as if intending to strike.
         One significant red flag for intimidation is when an abuser throws
         objects, punches holes in the wall, or damages personal property. The
         intended message is, “This could be you.” The most terrifying form of
         intimidation is brandishing a weapon, such as a firearm. During a
         marriage counseling session, if a pastor hears these behaviors, he
         should consider it an indication a spouse is emotionally abusive.

         Emotional blackmail involves, but is not limited to, attempts to control
         a person by playing on their guilt, fear, or compassion.115 This
         includes exploiting the victim’s compassion by the abuser threatening
         to kill themself. Threatening suicide is a tactic which misuses a
         victim’s love to keep them under control. The most insidious form of
         emotional blackmail is when the abuser threatens to hurt the children.
         Abusers may threaten to hurt or kill the victim’s pets. Another tactic
         of emotional blackmail includes shifting the blame for the demise of
         the family to the victim if she acts decisively for her and the children’s
         safety.

         Isolation involves, but is not limited to, when an abuser attempts to
         control his wife’s relationships, movements, and/or even goals in

   113
       Beverly Engel, The Emotionally Abusive Relationship (Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2002), 10-11.
   114
       Lundy Bancroft, When Dad Hurts Mom: Helping Your Children Heal the
Wounds of Witnessing Abuse (New York, NY: Penguin Books, 2004), 34.
   115
       Engel, The Emotionally Abusive Relationship, 31-32.
                                       1053
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



      life.116 This includes preventing a spouse from working, involvement
      in church, or other activities. Many abusers strongly discourage
      outside relationships with family and/or friends. An abusive husband
      may monitor his wife’s phone calls, texts, and/or emails. Smartphones
      with tracking devices are a powerful tool used to isolate and/or
      monitor a victim’s time and activities away from the home. An abuser
      will often interrogate the victim when she returns.

      Gaslighting involves, but is not limited to, causing a victim to doubt
      their perception of reality.117 The term, “gaslighting” originated in a
      1940s film by the same name. It includes using many subtle but
      powerful tactics to communicate to the victim that she is crazy. This
      is accomplished as the abuser repeatedly claims the victim is
      misinterpreting events or constantly correcting their perception. The
      abuser generally insists on an alternate interpretation (or “narrative”).
      It may also involve insinuating the victim is exaggerating or lying. The
      power of gaslighting resides in its sustained use over time, and its use
      in concert with other tactics. The cumulative effect is that the victim
      doubts their mental health and perception of reality. This diminishes
      confidence in their own agency and creates a vulnerability to be more
      easily manipulated and/or controlled. The impact of gaslighting
      cannot be underestimated. It is terrifying to question your sanity.

      Using children as pawns involves but is not limited to the abuser’s
      misuse of their children to manipulate and control a victim.118 This
      includes manipulating the children into taking the abuser’s side and/or
      triangulate them between the parents during a conflict. An abuser may
      force the children to watch arguments and then appeal to them for
      support. Some abusers require the children to monitor and report on
      the victim’s behavior in their absence. A particularly vicious tactic is
      psychological cruelty to or physical abuse of the children for the
      purpose of upsetting the spouse. Abusers may purposely upset the
      children and then prevent their spouse from comforting them when
      they cry. They may shift blame or gaslight and accuse the victim of
      upsetting the children. Abusers often threaten to take the children from
      the victim either through legal means or by kidnapping. Abusers can
      and do kidnap their children.


116
    Branson and Silva, Violence Among Us, 22.
117
    Engel, The Emotionally Abusive Relationship, 36-37.
118
    Bancroft, When Dad Hurts Mom, 140.
                                    1054
                                    APPENDIX V



A marriage is emotionally abusive when one spouse uses multiple behavior
patterns on a consistent basis. Regular use of these tactics creates an oppressive
environment in the home. The victim and family are trapped in bondage to the
abuser’s moods and emotions. Although emotional abuse leaves no visible
bruises, it is difficult to understate the impact.

B. Spiritual Abuse: Using a person’s faith as a tactic for manipulation and
control119

Spiritual abuse occurs when Scripture is used to belittle, threaten, or justify
unreasonable expectations. An abusive spouse may quote passages such as
Proverbs 5:19 to justify sex on demand. First Corinthians 7:1-5 may be used
to justify ungodly behavior such as physical or sexual assault or dehumanizing
control. Ephesians 5:25-26 may be used to establish an entitled sense of
superiority and/or weaponized into a tool of domination. In the hands of an
abuser, the Word of God may be a tool to tear down a victim rather than build
her up (Rom. 14:19). Abusers may take good and pure truths and twist them
into a perverse shadow of what God intended.

Spiritual abuse occurs when an abuser demands submission. In an abusive
relationship, there is very little that is open to discussion and compromise.
Submission is frequently played as a trump card to get what the abuser wants.
Abusers conflate their personal will with the will of God and use the doctrine
of submission to maintain a position of control. For more discussion on
submission, see the chapter on shepherding the abuser.

C. Economic Abuse: Behavior that dominates a person financially120

There are two tactics in economic abuse:

           1. The first, related to the abuser’s desire for power, results in
              maintaining tight control over the finances.
              • An abuser may prohibit their spouse from working outside the
                 home to maintain dominance over the victim through
                 financial dependence.
              • A common tactic is to unilaterally impose a highly restrictive
                 allowance on the victim.



   119
         Branson and Silva, Violence Among Us, 25-27.
   120
         Sanderson, Counseling Survivors of Domestic Abuse, 26.
                                         1055
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            •  At times, the victim’s allowance includes the requirement of
               purchasing the household necessities.
           • An abuser may keep most of the family budget and/or spend
               as desired.
           • An abuser may demand an account of every cent spent and
               interrogate the victim regarding their purchases.
                    o An abuser usually does not hold himself to the same
                         careful standard as the victim.
           • An abuser may use guilt or accuse of irresponsibility even if
               the victim purchases only household necessities.
           • An abuser may hide information about finances or threaten to
               leave the family and withdraw financial support.
        2. The second is related to an abuser’s sense of entitlement, and it
           results in financial recklessness.
           • An abuser may feel entitled to spend money without regard
               for how it impacts the victim or children.
           • An abuser will likely have irresponsible debts.
           • An abuser may force the victim to work and provide for him
               and/or the family.
           • An abuser may use the victim to finance dreams or pay debts.
           • An abuser may ruin his own credit.
           • An abuser may ruin his victim’s credit.
           • An abuser may ruin his young adult children’s credit.

D. Sexual Abuse: Any unwanted contact or interaction that occurs for the
   sexual stimulation of the abuser121

Sexual abuse is the most difficult category of abuse to discuss. Sexual assault
in the home is well-hidden, and the related shame and confusion often prevents
victims from disclosing.

It may take much time, carefulness, and wisdom for a counselor or helper to
build the trust necessary for a victim to share the horrifying details. Victims
may never feel comfortable enough to discuss such personal trauma with their
male pastors and elders. This is not a personal insult. From the perspective of
victims, sexual abuse is the most degrading and damaging form of abuse.



   121
       Dan Allender, The Wounded Heart: Hope for Adult Victims of Childhood Sexual
Abuse (Colorado Springs, CO: NavPress, 2008), 47.
                                      1056
                                    APPENDIX V



Sexual abuse encompasses multiple behaviors. The following is not meant to
be an all-inclusive list.

           •   An abuser may manipulate or relentlessly pressure his spouse for
               sex.
           •   An abuser may make sexual advances in public that make the
               victim very uncomfortable.
           •   An abuser may force the victim to watch pornography.
           •   An abuser may force the victim to perform sexual acts that she
               finds unpleasant, painful, and/or humiliating.
           •   An abuser may force sodomy.
           •   An abuser may force the victim to take prescription sleep aids.
           •   An abuser may force the victim to drink too much alcohol.
           •   An abuser may violently rape the victim.
           •   An abuser may force their victims to perform sexual acts with
               other people under the threat of violence.

E. Physical Abuse: Any behavior that dominates a person through physical
   force or violence122

Physical abuse encompasses multiple behaviors. The following is not meant
to be an all-inclusive list.

           •   Hitting with hands or objects
           •   Kicking
           •   Punching
           •   Choking or placing hands around her neck
           •   Scratching
           •   Cutting
           •   Pinning to the ground or any other surface
           •   Biting
           •   Pinching
           •   Squeezing with intent to subdue
           •   Snapping with fingers or any other object
           •   Grabbing in anger
           •   Throwing objects at or in the direction of (despite whether the
               abuser is successful at hitting the intended target)
           •   Pushing

   122
         Branson and Silva, Violence Among Us, 24.
                                        1057
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         •    Pulling hair
         •    Strangulation
         •    Slapping
         •    Spanking an adult
         •    Torture
         •    Sleep deprivation
         •    Sexual assault
         •    Rape
         •    Assault with a weapon
         •    Attempted or committed homicide
         •    Chasing for the purpose of any of the above (despite whether the
              abuser is successful at catching the intended target)

The impact of physical abuse is multiplied exponentially when combined with
emotional abuse. The feeling of terror and helplessness engendered by a
previous physical assault might be reproduced in the victim by “the look,” a
clearing of the throat, or slamming shut a book for example, even if no future
physical assault occurs. (See “Definitions – Trigger and/or PTSD.”)

The Spectrum of Abuse




The five forms of domestic abuse exist on a spectrum that builds in intensity.
Emotional abuse may be the first tactic to appear in a relationship. As the abuse
escalates, the abuser adds other tactics. It is very common for abusers to utilize
three or four tactics. However, due to the consequences for visible injuries,
many refrain from harming their wives physically.123

Abuse escalates. The tactics of abuse between emotional and physical might
be added in any order, which is signified by the double-sided arrows on the
above diagram. Some tactics may never be utilized by an abuser. For example,
a particular abuser may not care much about money, and therefore not control
by the misuse of their finances. But the same abuser might engage in sexual
abuse. The tactics and severity of abuse will differ from person to person.

    123
        Not including instances of sexual assault, as this type of physical abuse is
easily kept secretive.
                                          1058
                                     APPENDIX V



Emotional abuse tends to be the starting point, moving toward the most serious
form of physical.124
As the abuse builds in intensity, the victim’s experience is very confusing. The
intensity tends to rise gradually. If the abuser is not abusing physically, the
victim will often not detect the escalation. The physical abuse may be the
unmistakable red flag that leads the victim to confide in a friend, family
member, and/or pastor. In these situations, the physically abusive episode may
appear to be an isolated incident. However, physical abuse was simply the
latest tactic in the patterns of abuse building over time. If a man is abusing his
wife physically, he is also abusing her emotionally. He is probably abusive in
other ways as well. The victim may not be familiar with the definitions and
patterns of abuse, and therefore unable to clearly articulate what is happening.
But physical abuse is just the tip of the iceberg.

Difficulty in Disclosure

When someone discloses characteristics of abuse, it is important to listen and
act in a way that supports the person and keeps them protected. God’s desire
is that we support those who have been abused (Matt. 19:13-15; Luke 17:2).
In the moment of disclosure or discovery, the church must also provide care.

Disclosing domestic abuse is very difficult. Primarily, the victim’s safety is
the greatest concern. Only a victim has the information necessary to decide if,
when, and how to report what is happening in the home. The victim lives with
the consequences for reporting; therefore, it is wise to let her set the pace in
the process. See Shepherding the Victim to Safety below.
The power differential in the abusive relationship also makes reporting abuse
risky. Consider potential outcomes of disclosing when the abuser has
employed tactics of . . .

         ● Gaslighting. The victim risks not being believed, as the abuser
           has often told her would be the case.
         ● Spiritual abuse. Unfortunately, many leaders misunderstand
           domestic abuse, so they might instruct a wife she should be more
           submissive and/or more sexual. Hearing this from a spiritual
           leader perpetuates the misuse of Scripture by an authoritative
           figure.


   124
      Physical abuse is not limited to hitting and kicking. Suicide is also an ultimate
form of physical abuse as the abuser “punishes” their victim. She will ask what she
did wrong/could have done differently to prevent his demise for the rest of her life.
                                         1059
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        ● Economic abuse. An abuser who controls the family finances
            might hire an aggressive lawyer. Abusers are known to use the
            court system to perpetuate their power and control.
        ●   Emotional blackmail. Threatening to take or hurt the children.
        ●   Children as pawns. An abuser may continue to or begin
            threatening the children and/or mistreating and abusing them.
        ●   Isolation. An abuser may increasingly isolate the victim from
            friends and family.
        ●   Verbal abuse. After many years of verbal onslaught, the victim
            may believe the abuser’s narrative. If he has repeatedly treated her
            harshly and called her stupid, worthless, ugly, fat, or told her no
            one would want her or that she couldn’t make it without him, she
            may feel silenced. She may blame herself and even defend him
            because, as he said, she’s “disobedient and stupid.”

In the absence of disclosure, a clear sign of abuse is the presence of bruises,
black eyes, and/or broken bones. Often this evidence is hidden behind
sunglasses, high necklines, and long sleeves even during warm weather. The
evidence can also be explained away by vague stories of clumsiness. When
questioned, a victim will become obviously uncomfortable and brush it off or
change the subject.

Evidence of abuse might be determined by a careful observation of a victim’s
demeanor. This is not to say these characteristics are determinative for abuse.
The following descriptions of behavior are also not all-inclusive. However,
these questions might be helpful for clarification.

        ●   Is she especially timid and/or fearful?
        ●   Is she overly self-effacing?
        ●   Is she subdued, even fearful, around her husband?
        ●   Does she scurry to do what he says?
        ●   Is he arrogant, rigid, critical, controlling?
        ●   Does he speak and act disrespectfully towards her or about her?
        ●   Does he appear to control her, keep her under his thumb?
        ●   Does he refuse to sacrificially support the use of her gifts in the
            Body?
        ●   Does she have difficulty making eye contact with the pastor or
            elders?
        ●   Is she “not allowed” to attend church meetings or Bible study
            unless accompanied by her husband?
        ●   Is she anxious about getting home “on time”?
                                     1060
                                  APPENDIX V




The imbalance of power in an abusive relationship causes a greater
disadvantage when a victim reports the abuse. Research shows that the
abuser’s power within the relationship usually corresponds to a higher level of
social and relational power in the community.125 Abusers have fewer social
restraints and more resources. The abuser’s higher social standing tempts
many to believe his narrative rather than hers. When domestic abuse is alleged,
church leaders may dismiss accusations because they think they know the
abuser and, “He wouldn’t do anything like that.” Such a response ignores
Scriptures such as John 2:23-25 and Jeremiah 17:9, which teach that every
human being is capable of deceitfulness and can hide private sins from the
public eye. The abuser is often left unscathed during an investigation while the
victim is told to be quiet and/or cease speaking about her experiences.

Conversely, victims experience great social restraint. They have been
conditioned to keep their thoughts to themselves, yield to the emotions of the
person with greater power, and be more cautious in their behavior. For a
victim, the abuser seems more powerful than the systems meant to protect.126
In disclosing, the victim may risk accusations of gossip, slander, and/or ruining
the abuser’s reputation. A victim may also be silenced for the sake of the
church’s reputation. Church leaders should not put the image of the church
above the safety of its congregants. When we wear His name, we should also
bear His likeness.

4. Responding

Disclosure of Domestic Abuse

Domestic abuse is an equal opportunity destroyer impacting generations of
men, women, and children. Jesus calls us to proclaim the gospel through
evangelism, but He also calls us to minister to those who are oppressed (Isa.
58:6-7). The church must have an unfailing commitment to be governed by
what God says about justice, mercy, and defending the vulnerable. Silence
does not protect the church or Christ’s name.127 When we stay silent, we tell
the world, victims, and abusers we are okay with violence in the home. We tell
children that violence is normal and the church does not care whether they or

   125
       Gerben Van Kleef et al., “Power, Distress and Compassion,” Psychological
Science 19:12 (2008): 1315-1322, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02241.x.
   126
       Snyder, No Visible Bruises, 71.
   127
       Diane Langberg, “How To have a Culture of Child Protection,” presentation,
Grace Baptist Church, CA, 2016.
                                      1061
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



their family is hurting. Over against this posture, the God of refuge calls His
church to be a safe haven for victims of abuse.

Intervention by godly response helps break the chain of perpetual abuse.
Intervening is quite costly in terms of time and energy. It requires wisdom,
patience, and courage to battle evil and deception. Responding well includes
naming the evil of abuse for what it is. We must not ignore, minimize, or
passively condone abuse or else the church becomes, “whitewashed tombs,
which outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of dead people’s bones
and all uncleanness” (Matt. 23:27).

What To Do Regarding Disclosure of Domestic Abuse

A godly response to the disclosure or discovery of abusive behaviors in
Christian homes includes, but is not limited to, the following.

        ● Prior to disclosure or discovery, church leadership sets the pace
          for the congregation in the treatment of women. Leaders honor
          their wives and speak to and about their wives with respect.
          Leaders encourage and facilitate the development and use of their
          spouses’ gifts as God directs. Leaders encourage staff and church
          members to do the same.
        ● Label abuse as such. To prescribe the appropriate response, abuse
          must be called by its rightful name. To label otherwise is to
          minimize sin and treat the things that God hates lightly.
          Minimizing abuse fails to keep the flock safe and fails to direct
          the abuser to a path of repentance, redemption, and perhaps
          reconciliation. If at first you are unsure what you are encountering
          rises to the level of abuse, start by using the words which describe
          the behavior that is uncovered: harsh, cruel, manipulative,
          deceptive, etc. Abuse is comprised of many sins, and a good start
          is to accurately label sin. Eventually a determination needs to be
          made if the constellations of sin that are uncovered rise to the level
          of abuse, but that may take time.
        ● Protect sheep. Resist sending the woman back into a dangerous
          situation with instructions to pray and/or submit more. Abuse
          occurs because there is an abuser, not because a victim has not
          prayed or submitted enough. Specific steps that a shepherd can
          take to ensure the safety of victims will be discussed in the next
          section.

                                     1062
                                 APPENDIX V



        ● Provide at least one trained, respected, godly woman to
            accompany the victim to Session meetings, team meetings, court,
            and other situations when she may be frightened and/or
            overwhelmed.
        ●   Form and train a team of men and women to function with
            knowledge and authority in situations involving domestic abuse,
            as they come alongside the victim, children, and abuser.
        ●   Read widely from both pastoral and clinical sources to become
            familiar with the dynamics of domestic abuse, its typical effects
            on the victim and her children, and the characteristics and
            dynamics of the person who abuses. Mere “conventional wisdom”
            has been costly in many domestic abuse situations.
        ●   Familiarize yourself with training and resources provided by local
            domestic abuse organizations. Consider training elders and/or
            church leaders so they are familiar with the dynamics and process
            in domestic abuse.
        ●   Establish ongoing oversight of the educational and training
            measures addressed in “Prevention and Deterrence” (p. 1085 of
            this report).
        ●   Familiarize yourself with state and local laws that might impact
            the situation and available, accessible resources.
        ●   Familiarize yourself with the names and contact information of
            emergency departments, shelters, attorneys, advocates,
            employment-training facilities, food banks, etc.
        ●   Establish connection with specific individuals in the public sector
            who assist with their skills and resources.
        ●   Host seminars utilizing professionals to educate the staff and
            perhaps the congregation about domestic abuse and best practices.
        ●   Provide other resources and books on domestic abuse in the
            church library.

What Not To Do Regarding Disclosure of Domestic Abuse

It is not wise to conduct marriage counseling with both spouses together in
cases of alleged, suspected, or disclosed abuse. Marriage counseling can be
dangerous in cases of domestic abuse and may even result in further harm to
the victim. Marriage counseling should not occur until individual counseling
with an informed counselor has resulted in long-term evidence of the abuser’s
repentance, empathy, and genuine godly sorrow for their abusive behavior.


                                     1063
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



An unbalanced focus on “keeping the marriage together” at any cost may
prevent confrontation of the private sin of abuse that happens behind the closed
doors of a Christian home. Christian marriages are to reflect Christ and His
church; therefore, leaders must “take no part in the unfruitful works of
darkness, but instead expose them. For it is shameful even to speak of the
things that they do in secret” (Eph. 5:11-12). Addressing abuse in the home is
for the sake of the gospel as much as, or even more so, than preserving the
marriage. An abusive marriage is a blemish on Christ’s body. The church must
protect Christ’s reputation and eradicate the evil of abuse in Christian
marriages.

5. Reporting

Be familiar with the reporting requirements in your state. Typically, these laws
are less stringent for adult abuse than they are for child abuse. In the case of
domestic abuse, reporting is not recommended unless mandated by state law.
It violates the victim’s freedom, and it may unintentionally jeopardize her
safety. It is important to allow the victim to direct adult abuse reporting unless
mandated by state law.

It is recommended the following be appointed to respond to the survivor and
accused:

        1. Church Advocacy Group
        2. Session Crisis Intervention Team

Church Advocacy Group

Those who have experienced any form of abuse and/or assault should have an
easily accessible, empathetic, reliable, and formal means of reporting. Persons
with like experience may help in decreasing the fear of reporting. Appointed
and highly visible advocates in the local church might include a small group
of well-trained members. The advocacy group should document the concern
or complaint in sufficient detail to categorize it as reportable to public
authorities (such as physical abuse, rape, sexual assault, physical assault,
battery, kidnapping, etc.) or non-reportable (spiritual, verbal, emotional,
financial abuse, doctrinal error, abusive leadership, sexual harassment,
adultery, deceit, etc.).




                                      1064
                                    APPENDIX V



Crisis Intervention Team128
The Crisis Intervention Team should consist of effective, wise, and disciplined
elders (other than those assigned to advocacy group) able to intervene
promptly, efficiently, and effectively to the complaint.

Major tasks will be to . . .

         1. Investigate the matter,
         2. Relieve any allegedly abusive leaders from duty, and
         3. Provide shepherding counsel and support to victims, abusers, and
         their families.

In the case that the accused is a pastor, the Crisis Intervention Team is also
responsible as a liaison with the Presbytery and as communication to and with
the congregation and general public regarding the matter. Truth, honesty, and
accountability should be the hallmarks of the team’s interactions with the
accused, congregation, presbytery, and with the public.

If the alleged abuser is in leadership, the Crisis Intervention Team (or
appointed elder) should inform the accused of the charge and initiate process
to relieve him from duty immediately. They should conduct their investigation
in such a way as to carefully shepherd the victim and preserve her safety (see
“Redemptive Shepherding” below), anonymity, privacy, and welfare.

Reportable complaints should be given to police. The Advocacy Group and/or
Crisis Intervention Team should inform the pastor and/or Session (the latter
only if the pastor is implicated) immediately after submission to authorities
and give them their written report. This is to avoid cover-up for serious crimes
and offenses at the beginning, the most crucial phase of the process.

   128
       In a PCA church, the pastor, who had read widely about domestic abuse,
commissioned a ruling elder to form a team who could walk alongside a woman who
had escaped from a heavily armed, abusive husband and was living in the home of a
person outside the congregation for safety’s sake. The team consisted of two elders, a
trained woman, and a deacon who could address the financial concerns. The team met
with the displaced woman every two to three weeks to encourage her, pray with her,
provide for her needs, and serve as a go-between for the woman and her husband so
she did not have to endure his abusive, threatening emails and phone calls. The team
leader updated the pastor weekly. Additional care can come in the form of appropriate
topical Bible studies and support with parenting issues. Youth leaders can come
alongside the children to offer a listening ear and encouragement.


                                        1065
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Non-reportable complaints should be written in sufficient detail and presented
to the Session. It is wise to shield a victim’s identity unless given permission
to disclose. If the complaint is warranted, the Session might plan a strategy to
confront the accused. A complaint considered unwarranted should be
documented and provided to the accuser with the reasons for the determination.

The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should meet with the accused after the complaint is lodged, as soon as possible
if reported to authorities. Prior to this meeting, they should engage in prayer
for wisdom, discernment, and the preservation of the honor of Christ and His
church, as well as for grace in approach to both parties.

A written complaint should be presented to the accused. The accused’s
response will be documented verbatim by the advocates, including the
responses to appropriate, further clarifying questions. Such questions should
provide details of . . .

        •   Factual occurrence,
        •   Motives,
        •   Emotions,
        •   Prior events pertinent to the investigation as seen fit by the
            investigators and accused,
        •   Specific disagreement,
        •   Regret,
        •   Remorse, or
        •   Repentance expressed by the accused.

Each answer should be recorded in as much detail as possible, using direct
quotes rather than paraphrases. These questions and statements should be
recorded and documented until the meeting has reached a conclusion.
Questions refused should also be so recorded.

The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should meet following a confrontation for prayer and to deliberate upon,
analyze, and formulate their findings and conclusion of the preliminary
investigation. They should document their findings and recommendations for
further pursuit of the complaint in writing and submit them to the accused. At
the presentation to the accused, the team should record any rebuttal,
clarification, or other response of the accused.


                                     1066
                                 APPENDIX V



The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should prayerfully deliberate on the written complaint, response, and rebuttal,
and amend or sustain the original findings and recommendation in a final
report. This report should be given to both accuser and accused. The following
are possible courses of action that may be recommended to the Session:

        1. The issue be resolved with follow-up by the Advocacy Group
           and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder to both
           parties separately.
        2. The issue requires further investigation by Session and/or
           outside investigators or counsel before actions can be
           recommended.
        3. The abuse report requires immediate action such as contacting
           the police or Presbytery [if a pastor] if not already contacted,
           suspension from duty, or medical/psychiatric intervention.
        4. Action requires a formal program of biblical counseling,
           spiritual discipline, mentoring, and accountability of progress in
           conformity to Christ by one or both parties.
        5. Formal charges or dissolution of pastoral relationship if
           warranted [if a pastor].

When the Abuser Is a Teaching Elder

Besides prayer, confrontation, deliberation, and investigation, it is important
that PCA churches avail themselves of the formal system for accountability if
a teaching elder is exhibiting signs of abuse and refusing to repent.

The PCA Book of Church Order (BCO) Chapter 34 is titled “Special Rules
Pertaining to Process Against a Minister.” A church minister (teaching elder)
is a “member” of a Presbytery, not the local church. Therefore, when his sin is
repetitive following the attempt of members to confront him, it is necessary to
pursue accountability through members of the Presbytery (34-4).

There are three possible ways to proceed by the Session or church members:

        1. Discuss the matter with another elder in the Presbytery, of which
           the teaching elder is a member, seeking their personal aid in
           further confrontation;
        2. Bring clear, documented proof of unrepentant leadership failure
           to the committee that handles charges brought against member
           pastors for their consultation; or
                                     1067
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        3. Bring charges against the minister before this committee. Two
           witnesses must bring testimony (BCO 34-5) or there must be clear
           “corroborative evidence.”

Although the first and second options may be less intimidating to church
members, bringing an abusive leader to trial may be necessary to provide
safety to the greater church. A teaching elder who has been found unrepentant
will be publicly disallowed from ministry in the PCA as long as evidence of
unrepentance remains.

However, it must be understood that pastoral failure which does not involve
“heretical” teaching must clearly evidence damage to Christ’s church for
judicial action to be taken against a pastor.

        Heresy and schism may be of such a nature as to warrant deposition;
        but errors ought to be carefully considered, whether they strike at the
        vitals of religion and are industriously spread, or whether they arise
        from the weakness of the human understanding and are not likely to
        do much injury (BCO 34-5).

Should the congregation wish to remove a teaching elder due to his abuse, they
are required to follow these steps:

        1. “. . . there shall always be a meeting of the congregation called
           and conducted in the same manner as the call of the Pastor (BCO
           23-1).”
        2. The meeting must be presided over by a ruling or teaching elder
           of the PCA.
        3. The will of the congregation (as voted upon) is presented to the
           Presbytery for approval for the “dissolution of the pastoral
           relation.”


Independent Assessments or Investigations

After the Session has received the preliminary investigation report of the
Advocacy Group/elder, they may wish to investigate further or engage expert
outside counsel. Outside independent counsel should be sought for potential
felony or any complaint that was reported to police or public agencies.
Examples of such outside counsel include legal, certified public accountants,


                                     1068
                                   APPENDIX V



trained counselors, trained advocates, psychological and/or medical personnel,
and/or seminary faculty with expertise in the field.

The safety of the victim(s), responsibility of the church, and accountability are
foremost in the work of an independent counsel.

6. Redemptive Shepherding

Shepherding the Victim to Safety

The priority is the victim’s safety.129

         •   Confrontation. When a victim confides abusive behavior, it’s
             tempting to confront the alleged abuser for his perspective of the
             allegations. If accusations are founded, and the spouse is abusive,
             he may exact punishing behavior on the victim for reporting.
             Confronting the accused puts the victim in jeopardy. Before any
             confrontation can take place, the victim’s safety must be assured.
         •   Separation. Safety may include separating the victim and any
             children from the abuser. Caution is strongly encouraged. The
             most dangerous time in an abusive relationship happens when a
             victim tries to leave.130 Abusers often escalate behaviors in order
             to strengthen control and force the victim to stay.
         •   Team. Most pastors do not have the bandwidth to shepherd a
             victim alone. It is recommended the pastor create a team of people
             to come alongside the victim and her children, as well as the
             abuser.
         •   Agency. Prioritize the victim’s freedom.131 Throughout the
             process, the victim should set the pace. An abuser controls every
             facet of a victim’s world. Her recovery will benefit from
             relearning how to make wise decisions. Provide the victim with
             the necessary options (see below) and resources and then come
             alongside to help her navigate solutions. Victims are conditioned
             to depend on their abuser’s control, so they may look to others to
             make decisions. Resist this temptation. Some victims will make
             choices with which you disagree. For instance, they may not take
   129
        Sanderson, Counseling Survivors of Domestic Abuse, 110.
   130
         Brenda Branson and Paula J. Silva, “Options for Victims of Domestic
Violence,” Focus Ministries, https://www.focusministries1.org/resources/domestic-
violence-articles.
    131
        Branson and Silva, Violence Among Us, 76.
                                          1069
                        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                 steps necessary for protection or may stay in or return to the
                 abusive situation. The victim must live with her decision, so resist
                 taking control.
           •     Network. Enlist the help of other institutions that can help achieve
                 safety. The church may not have the resources to meet all the
                 victim’s needs. Law enforcement, an attorney, a professional
                 counselor, a victim’s advocate, or a battered women’s shelter will
                 be very helpful.132 Have the victim be the primary liaison between
                 these organizations. Victim ownership over their situation will
                 promote responsibility, decisiveness, and self-sufficiency.
           •     Evaluate. All options have the potential for greater risk. Calling
                 law enforcement is an excellent way to provide immediate
                 protection, but afterwards the abuser may respond violently. An
                 order of protection is somewhat helpful; however, it is only a piece
                 of paper. Abusers often choose to violate restraining and
                 protection orders. The wisest course of action will be to work
                 slowly and patiently. The potential danger to the victim is another
                 reason that she must set the pace for all decisions. She has the best
                 knowledge of the abuser and situation. Err on the side of safety.

Options for Safety

The following are intended to be thorough, but not exhaustive. All situations
are unique and may require more creative solutions.

Call the Police: If a victim feels unsafe, their first call is 911. This option can
provide a victim with swift protection when threatened or when an abuser
becomes violent. But abusers may be adept at manipulating the situation and
casting doubt on the victim’s story. If the police leave without making an
arrest, the abuser may commit further offences as punishment.

Victim’s Advocate: An advocate can provide professional assistance with
safety planning, perform a lethality assessment that helps determine the threat
level of an abuser, and guide victims in securing an order of protection.
Network with the victim advocates in your area and have up to date contact
information available to victims in need.

Order of Protection: An order of protection may be wise if the victim leaves
the home. In many states, a protection order can also be written to force the

   132
         Ibid.
                                          1070
                                    APPENDIX V



abuser to leave the home. A victim should plan ahead and secure the order
without the abuser’s knowledge. Contact a victim’s advocate for assistance
securing an order.

Find Alternate Housing: It may be necessary for the victim to leave the home,
at least for a season. It is wise for the victim to leave without the abuser’s
knowledge. This takes careful planning.133 Arrange to leave at a precise day
and time when the husband will be out of the
house. Preschedule an appointment with a victim advocate to procure a
protection order within hours of departure from the home.

Any children should remain with the victim. Those advising or assisting
victims who leave should be familiar with local law. In some states, if the
victim takes her children for more than five days, she can be charged with
kidnapping. Victims may also have legal trouble if they prohibit child
visitation. In addition, the state may require that victims with children remain
within a certain proximity to the home. Contact the local victim’s advocate for
the most up-to- date laws governing your specific area.

Keep living arrangements private when a victim leaves. Use discernment when
placing a victim in a “known” location such as with family, friends, or church
members. If no suitable options are available, contact a local women’s shelter.
Network with the victim advocates in your area and have up-to-date contact
information available to victims in need. At times, victims are safer staying in
the home. This enables them to monitor the abuser’s moods and anger level
and take the appropriate measures to keep safe. The living arrangement
decision belongs to the victim.

Prepare To Live Independently: A victim will need to prepare before leaving
the home by saving money in a private account or keeping funds in an
undisclosed location. If this option is not possible, the victim might consider
withdrawing funds from accounts immediately after leaving. Timing will be
important; the transaction will need to be completed before the abuser is aware
of her absence. It is also wise to open a new cell phone account and get a
different number prior to or soon after leaving. Make sure to have the victim
turn off tracking on their devices (“Find My Friends”). Advise that she create
a new email address, change passwords on accounts, and apply for credit cards
in her own name. Consult a victim advocate and create a safety plan to identify
additional strategies.


   133
         Sanderson, Counseling Survivors of Domestic Abuse, 121.
                                        1071
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Provide for Basic Needs: If the victim does not have the means to support
herself and the children, she may need to seek public assistance (e.g.,
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF), etc.). Familiarize yourself with the resources
available in your community to refer to the proper organizations. The church
may also be able to offer financial assistance from its deacon’s fund.
Find Employment: For victims who do not work outside the home, assist in
finding resources in the community for gaining employment. Potential sources
to consider are social media referrals,134 job fairs or platforms, staffing or
recruitment agencies, searching in industry publications, browsing the internet,
and subscribing to job search emails. Neighborhood apps may also list
employment opportunities close to home. Church members with businesses
may be willing to hire (perhaps even short term) or help network. Assist
victims who require further education in finding scholarships and/or resources
for returning to school. Connect with members in the congregation for
childcare.

Secure Permanent Housing: Shelters and hospitable friends and family are
options for the short term. However, if the victim is separated from her
husband long term, she will need to find more permanent housing. Church
members with real estate credentials and/or deacons may be helpful in securing
a suitable location.

Structured Separation:135 A structured separation is an alternative to divorce
for victims of domestic abuse who want to save their marriages. To ensure the
victim’s safety and wellbeing, she lives apart from her partner for a specific
period of time. A document is created that outlines living arrangements,
creates boundaries, and lays out a process of change and healing for the couple.
It is recommended that the abusive partner demonstrate changed behavior for
six to twelve months before cohabitation resumes. It is not wise to create a
structured agreement until the victim is safely located away from the abuser.

Divorce:136 This is the most serious option for securing the victim’s safety, but
it may be necessary. In most cases of marriage conflict, we define success as
the restoration of the marriage. But domestic abuse requires us to redefine what
constitutes success. In an abuse case, success is defined as seeing God set the
victim free from oppression. This could occur through the restoration of her

   134
        If the victim needs anonymity, help by searching social media for her.
   135
        Branson and Silva, Violence Among Us, 79-80.
    136
        See The Seventh Commandment, Section One, p. 985, as well as the Attachment
11: Divorce and Domestic Abuse, p. 1232.
                                       1072
                                   APPENDIX V



marriage or the ending of her marriage. The form freedom takes will depend
on the abuser’s repentance, the victim’s decisions, and the providence of God.

Many victims who pursue a divorce do not have the financial means to hire an
attorney. If this is the case, they can request that an attorney take their case for
reduced fee or pro bono. Your community may also have a self-help law center
that victims can utilize.

Sometimes attorneys will recommend that the couple pursue a mediation to
resolve the divorce, instead of litigation. In mediation, a mediator facilitates
the couple coming to a mutually agreed upon settlement regarding the division
of assets, child custody, and other issues involved in a divorce. While the
victim makes the final decision, mediation is not recommended. The vast
majority of mediators are not trained to handle cases of domestic abuse. They
do not understand the power imbalance inherent in an abusive marriage and
how that power imbalance impacts the mediation process.

Shepherding the Victim Spiritually

Life with an abusive husband is incredibly stressful and confusing. The person
a victim loves the most is hurting them, and they don’t necessarily have
categories for how to think about what’s happening, how to respond, how to
get help, and/or what the children may need. They juggle these questions,
concerns, and emotions all while trying to navigate the moods and behaviors
of the abuser. Often, a victim will say they walk on eggshells. Victims live in
a state of hyper-vigilance, constantly on high alert. Even if, or when, a victim
separates physically from an abuser, they may continue to live under the threat
of harm.

Counseling and Support Groups

Practically, pastors help victims process anger, shame, and fear. The victim
needs to hear God’s Word validate that the abuse committed is heinous sin,
and that He grieves with and for them. Pastors and the church family who
empathize with victims minister God’s comfort (2 Cor. 1:4). As the victim
experiences the love of Jesus Christ and the power of the Holy Spirit through
the ministry of the Word, they begin to find healing. Throughout this process,
trust is built, and care expressed. This provides relational capital and an ability
to speak into the difficulty effectively.



                                       1073
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The result of abuse, whether it be acute or chronic, is often trauma. Trauma is
an event that overwhelms and inspires helplessness and terror.137 Most pastors
are not equipped to counsel trauma, nor do they have the time. In addition to
the trauma of the abusive marriage, the victim needs to explore how past
trauma and family of origin feeds into the experience of domestic abuse.
Nevertheless, the following are spiritual issues a pastor can help explore.

Shame and Honor:138 Virtually all victims of abuse wrestle with shame, which
can be defined as a sense of worthlessness and rejection. A more popular term
is low self-esteem, but the biblical terminology of shame contains far more
depth. Low self-esteem is one-dimensional, whereas the biblical concept of
shame has three dimensions:

         1. The Personal Dimension: An individual has a low view of their
            own self-worth. This dimension of shame overlaps with the
            secular concept of low self-esteem.
         2. The Social Dimension: People in society reject the individual and
            ascribe them with little worth. The person wrestling with shame
            often feels like an outcast.
         3. The Spiritual Dimension: Apart from the work of Christ, we are
            all contaminated by sin and therefore separated from God, who is
            perfectly holy and cannot be in the presence of sin.

These three dimensions describe the victim’s experience of shame and the
facets it contains. In addition, we may delineate three sources of shame:

         1. The sins we commit: Our own sin defiles and renders us unholy
            and unacceptable in God’s sight.
         2. Something that happens to us: The sins that other people commit
            against us are especially shame inducing. While every human
            being’s shame is caused by sin, victims experience a much higher
            degree than the average person because of the sins of their abusers.
            Victims have been told they are worthless through countless
            words and actions. After years of being criticized, belittled,
            demeaned, treated like an object—hearing questions about their
            sanity—victims eventually believe that narrative.

   137
       Judith L. Herman, Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence – From
Domestic Abuse to Political Terror (New York, NY: Basic Books, 1997), 33-34.
   138
       This entire section is indebted to Edward T. Welch, Shame Interrupted: How
God Lifts the Pain of Worthlessness & Rejection (Greensboro, NC: New Growth Press,
2012). This book is an excellent resource for pastors and victims.
                                      1074
                                   APPENDIX V



           3. The people we are associated with: Like a disease, shame can
              spread from person to person, especially within a family.

Scripture provides pastors with tremendous resources for ministering to
victims by counteracting shame. There are approximately ten times more
references to shame than guilt in the Bible.139 In Scripture, the opposite of
shame is honor. Through His incarnation Jesus entered our fallen world. At
His baptism, He identified with sinful humanity in need of cleansing from
shame (Luke 3:21‒4:13). On the cross, Christ took our shame upon Himself
and received the condemnation that we deserve (Heb. 12:2). All of Christ’s
righteousness has been imputed to us, and therefore we have a place of honor
in God’s kingdom (2 Cor. 5:21). When Jesus returns, the curtain will be pulled
back and our true identity will be revealed (Isa. 61).

Victims experience tremendous healing when they encounter the position of
honor that God has provided in His kingdom. The following passages of
Scripture can be ministered to victims because of the work Christ has done to
make them part of His covenant people.

Zephaniah 3:14-20 speaks to all three dimensions of a victim’s shame.

           1. Personal Dimension: The condemnation that survivors feel will
              be taken away (v. 15), and their shame will be changed into praise
              and renown in all the earth. Feelings of worthlessness will be
              drowned out by the voice of God as He rejoices over them with
              singing.
           2. Social Dimension: God promises to gather survivors who feel like
              outcasts to experience the love and acceptance of His kingdom.
           3. Spiritual Dimension: Victims learn God has bestowed the
              greatest honor imaginable: He has made them His children.
              Because they are sons and daughters of the King, victims have the
              status of royalty in the kingdom. Their value and dignity flows
              from their relationship to the King.

Isaiah 62:1-5 speaks to a core component of identity.

           In this passage, God communicates identity as determined by what He
           thinks of His people. By giving victims a new name, He removes their
           previous identity as “forsaken” and replaces it with “delight.”


   139
         Ibid, 11.
                                       1075
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        Therefore, the accusations and criticisms that ring in a victim’s ears
        are lies replaced with the truth of what God says. In verses 1-2, God
        promises to proclaim this identity for all the world to hear. The shame
        that an abuser communicates will be drowned out by the voice of God.
        As God’s crown and diadem, His people are truly priceless. Like the
        jewels on the crown of a king, we are a visible sign of God’s glory. In
        many ways, Christ’s treatment of victims is the exact opposite of what
        they have experienced. They will receive honor instead of shame, and
        praise instead of criticism. Whereas earthly husbands reject them,
        Jesus rejoices over them.

Mark 5:24-34 brings victims riddled with shame face to face with their beloved
Redeemer.

        The woman Mark describes here was unclean. She had suffered from
        a discharge of blood for over twelve years. Anyone who touched her,
        or even touched something she had come in contact with, would have
        been unclean. As a result, people avoided her. When they saw her
        walking toward them, they fled. Like shame, uncleanness spreads
        from person to person. Uncleanness significantly impacted her
        worship as well because she was unable to go to the temple to have
        her sins atoned. She was effectively separated from people and from
        God (Lev. 15:25-31).

        When this woman encountered Jesus, all the shame she knew was
        reversed. Instead of her making Jesus unclean, He cleansed her. He
        removed her social shame and restored her to the Jewish community.
        Even more importantly, His cleansing reunited her with God. As in
        the language of Zephaniah 3, Jesus addressed her as “daughter.” God
        incarnate accepted her unconditionally as a father accepts his child.
        His acceptance transformed her from an outcast into royalty. Victims
        of abuse will immediately resonate with these truths. They, too,
        experience shame caused by something that has happened outside
        their control.

On the cross, Jesus entered into suffering and shame; therefore, He is
intimately aware of the human experience. Jesus, likewise, encountered
oppression, abuse, and rejection. He was falsely accused, betrayed by
companions, mocked, rejected, humiliated, spit on, beaten, and crucified. His
perfect righteousness is imputed to us, which means all victims share in His


                                     1076
                                     APPENDIX V



honor now and throughout eternity. There is incredible healing for victims as
they meditate on the reality of this gospel truth.

Fear and Love: In domestic abuse, relationships are governed by the fear of
man.140 Natural fear is an appropriate response to the dynamics of an abusive
marriage.141 The abuser uses intimidation and creates a fearful environment to
dominate and control. For protection, the victim must pour all her energy into
preventing abusive outbursts. Her attention is entirely focused on reading
emotions, navigating anger, and giving in to an abuser’s desires. In the context
of an abusive relationship, self-protection is a must. As human beings made in
the image of God, victims have value and dignity. Victims are worthy of
protection.

For the victim, fear of man is not confined to marriage. The abusive
relationship becomes the lens through which they see all other relationships.
Fear of man becomes the dominant mode of relating to others. Victims tend to
avoid tension in relationships by deferring to other people’s desires. They
avoid conflict at all costs, appear to be “people pleasers,” and have difficulty
saying “no.” This was not God’s good design for relationships. When victims
relate to non-abusive people out of fear, they are robbing themselves and
others of the blessings that come from relationships of love, trust, and
mutuality.

To heal from the relational damage caused by domestic abuse, victims need a
paradigm shift. The victim’s relationship with God must become the new lens
through which they see other relationships. Foundational for this paradigm
shift is 1 John 4:18: There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear.
For fear has to do with punishment, and whoever fears has not been perfected
in love.

Our relationship with God is governed by love. In love, God became a man
and sacrificed Himself on the cross for our sins. The Redeemer loves us and
casts out fear by taking our punishment on Himself. He took away our greatest
fear, eternal punishment. The contrast between the victim’s abuser and the

   140
       Allender, The Wounded Heart, 157; Langberg, On the Threshold of Hope, 171.
   141
       John Flavel, in Triumphing Over Sinful Fear, articulates “Natural fear” as “the
agitation of mind that arises when we perceive approaching evil or impeding danger”
(8). “Sinful fear” arises from unbelief (a distrust of God), fearing disproportionately
or excessively, fear that causes us to be unfit for duty, and/or fear that inclines escape
or brings a snare. John Flavel, Triumphing Over Sinful Fear, Ed. J. Stephen Yuille
(Grand Rapids, MI: Reformation Books, 2011), 8-20.
                                          1077
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Redeemer could not be greater. Abusers control through the fear of
punishment.

A new paradigm frees us to relate to others out of God’s love. Interactions with
others can be based on what is best for those involved, rather than seeking to
avoid conflict or people please. The person driven by love will be willing to
risk tension in the relationship or do something the other person finds
unpleasant (such as giving a rebuke), if that is what is best for them. A loving
person is willing to say no. Being loving is not simply to give people what they
want. People can want wrong things. People may want what is beyond
another’s capacity to give. Rather than being ruled by the desires of others,
victims shift the paradigm as they align with God’s desires.

Additionally, 2 Timothy 1:7 says, “For God gave us a spirit not of fear but of
power and love and self-control.”

Abusers dominate and take away personal power. In contrast, . . .

        •   God gives power. In the context of 2 Timothy, this means that He
            gives boldness to do His will in difficult situations. When seen
            through the lens of relationships, such boldness is the antithesis of
            fear of man.
        •   God gives love. His sacrificial love liberates us from the fear of
            punishment. This frees us to love Him and love others.
        •   God gives a spirit of self-control. Some survivors attempt to stop
            relating to others out of fear which results in anger and
            ungodliness. But God empowers us to control our behavior and
            obey Him in how we relate to others, even if emotions tempt them
            to do otherwise.

                Romans 8:15-16: “For you did not receive the spirit of
                slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received the
                Spirit of adoption as sons, by whom we cry, ‘Abba!
                Father!’ The Spirit Himself bears witness with our
                spirit that we are children of God.”

        Rebellion against God leads to fear of condemnation and wrath. But
        the Father removed this fear through the sacrifice of His Son. He
        adopted us as His children. A relationship with an abusive spouse is a
        stark contrast to this relationship with the Father. Abusers
        intentionally instill fear in their victims to control them. On the cross
                                      1078
                                 APPENDIX V



         God removed all reason to fear. Because of His work, we relate to Him
         as His children and call Him “Abba,” a term of great tenderness and
         intimacy. Our relationship with God is the paradigm for all other
         relationships, characterized by freedom rather than slavery. By
         ordering their world under this paradigm, victims have the freedom to
         say no, to make their own decisions, and the freedom to be fully
         human.

Forgiveness: [See also Attachment 9: Forgiveness] Scripture commands
loving and forgiving enemies as God in Christ forgave us (Luke 6:27-28; Col.
3:13). Forgiveness is defined as a decision to release someone from suffering
punishment or penalty for sin (Matt. 6:12; 18:21-35).142 Forgiveness is
incredibly difficult for those who have been oppressed and traumatized by the
person who was supposed to care, love, and protect. Forgiveness is both an
event and a process.143 In devastating circumstances, this will likely take much
time, consistent reminders, and patience with the process (1 Thess. 5:14, “Be
patient with them all”). The timing of forgiveness will vary from person to
person. A wise pastor will recognize this difficulty and gently guide a victim
beyond the damage done.

When forgiveness occurs, the abuser is released from suffering punishment for
sin. However, there is a distinction between punishment and consequences.
Punishment seeks to make the offender pay and even suffer for their actions.
Consequence is the result of the offender’s actions, but it is not motivated by
a desire to punish. For example, a lender may forgive a person’s debt, but
wisdom dictates that he never lends to that person again. Similarly, a victim
may genuinely forgive an abusive spouse, but that same wisdom may dictate
particular consequences. This may include, but not be limited to the following,

         •   A Loss of Trust: Domestic abuse is an act of betrayal. A spouse
             who has broken the marriage covenant by an abuse of power,
             degradation of another image-bearer, and repeated questioning
             regarding their reality, loses trust. Lack of trust is not
             unforgiveness. Forgiveness is a gift; trust earned is a long and
             difficult process of rebuilding.
         •   Legal Consequences: Physical abuse is a crime. Any legal
             consequences the abuser experiences are a result of their actions.


   142
     Ken Sande, The Peacemaker (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2004), 207.
     Tim Lane, “Pursuing and Granting Forgiveness,” CCEF The Journal of Biblical
   143

Counseling, Spring 2005.
                                     1079
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            Personal forgiveness does not include sheltering a criminal from
            the consequences of crimes committed. The experience of these
            consequences may even help lead to repentance.
        •   Separation: A victim may need to separate from the abuser to
            ensure safety and the safety of any children. Although it is
            counterintuitive, separation can be a useful tool for restoring an
            abusive marriage. It keeps the victim safe while giving the abuser
            an opportunity to receive help, demonstrate changed behavior, and
            rebuild trust.
        •   Divorce: Divorce and forgiveness may seem mutually exclusive,
            but they are not. Despite genuine forgiveness, it may not be safe
            for the victim or their children to remain with the abuser.
        •   Restricted Time with Children: Due to the atmosphere of an
            oppressive home, it will often be healthier for the children to
            spend less time with their abusive parent. Abusers will also use a
            separation and/or divorce as an opportunity to interrogate the
            children about the other parent. Often they will work toward
            encouraging the children to take sides. Restricted time lessens the
            children’s exposure to this type of behavior.

Shepherding the Abuser

God designed the spiritual leadership of husbands to reflect the image of
Christ. Therefore, Jesus’s use of power should be the model husbands follow
in their marriages. Jesus could have used His influence and status as God’s
Son to do whatever He wanted. But He did not. He laid aside His position and
privilege, humbling Himself by becoming man, submitting to the Father’s will
and dying on the cross. He used His power to bless His people.

When thinking of the characteristics of a godly husband, who by virtue of his
position has relational power in the home, Jesus is the model to be emulated.
In those chosen of God, holy and beloved, natural tendencies must be put off
diligently as part of the old nature, and a heart of compassion, kindness,
humility, gentleness, patience, and love must be cultivated. The word of Christ
must dwell richly within. A husband is to love his wife and not be harsh and
resentful towards her. He needs to learn to use his power sacrificially, like
Jesus did, on behalf of his wife (and family) and not diminish and control her.
It will take quite some time for these new patterns of behavior to develop, and
it will take the prayerful, encouraging support of other godly men to walk the
journey with him.

                                     1080
                                    APPENDIX V



The discussion below addresses how to approach many of the problems
Sessions encounter when shepherding abusers. The assumption at this point of
the process is that the victim is safe from harm. The following are intended to
be thorough, but not exhaustive. All situations are unique and may require
more specific solutions.

Godly or Worldly Repentance:144 Primary to effective shepherding care of an
abuser is to recognize the difficulty. Unfortunately, recidivism in cases of
domestic abuse is very high. The type of change which often occurs is simply
that the abuser modifies his tactics. Instead of using more overt types of abuse
(physical abuse), he employs those tactics which are more difficult to observe
(verbal or emotional abuse). A strong emotional outburst of sorrow and regret
in the pastor’s office does not always result in change in the home. Domestic
Abuse is a particularly heinous besetting sin (WCF 150).145 Shepherding care
may be a long and slow journey of resistance without substantial change. Pray
for these men on a regular and consistent basis. [See also Attachment 10:
Repentance]

Church Discipline: Church discipline is meant to be restorative, reconciling
the sinner to his heavenly Father. The process involved will help to hold the
abuser accountable to the Session. Sessions should be trained in understanding
patterns of abuse to navigate the inevitable, “he said, she said.” When there are
discrepancies between the accounts, look for the patterns. As a physician
investigates the correct symptoms for achieving a diagnosis, Sessions must
probe beyond what is said. Diagnosis is observable via patterns of behaviors.
Years of abusive behavior severely impacts a victim’s ability to effectively
communicate. Abusers do not experience this disadvantage and may seem far




   144
        See Attachment 10: Repentance for a discussion of godly and worldly
repentance.
   145
       The Westminster Larger Catechism lists four. Included here are the companion
behaviors endemic in domestic abuse italicized (1) the persons offending; a husband
commanded to love his wife (Eph. 5:28) (2) the parties offended; the wife of his youth
who he has covenanted to love, cherish, and protect (Gen. 2:22-24) (3) the nature and
quality of the offense; deliberate and intentional negative behaviors with the goal to
harm whether or not he succeeds (1 Sam. 19:9-10) and (4) the circumstances of time
and place; the home, the place where all—men, women, and children—are to be
nurtured, loved, and protected (Jer. 29:7).
                                        1081
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



more believable and articulate. Additionally, experts recognize that deception
is extremely hard to detect.146

Female Advocacy: Sitting with a Session and speaking of abuse is a frightening
and intimidating experience. The acts committed against victims are shameful
and private. For women, revealing these acts to male pastors or elders, no
matter how kind they are, is still a difficult and often traumatic event. Sessions
might consider reducing the number of people present in a meeting. It would
be beneficial to have female advocates as part of this process.

Community Resources: Research local community groups trained in working
with perpetrators of domestic abuse. Secular organizations may use the Duluth
Model, Emerge, or similar training. Many court-mandated programs, referred
to as Batterer Intervention Programs (BIPs), follow these models. Most states
require convicted offenders of partner abuse to attend a BIP course. These
secular models may be helpful; however, they will be deficient in their biblical
anthropology and their model for how people change. Churches can augment
these classes with their own counseling oversight of the abuser. Group classes
are typically more helpful than individual meetings. Other men in the group
can help point out patterns as well as challenge beliefs and behaviors for one
another.

*Christian Resources: There are several Christian resources available. Chris
Moles (chrismoles.org) offers an online class for abusive men (Men of Peace)
along with other resources for domestic abuse prevention and intervention.
Refuge Ministries, established by a PCA church, (refugeministries.com),
offers material and some support group locations. “Turning Point” is their
men’s program. Called to Peace (calledtopeace.org) provides a compassionate,
comprehensive, and Christ-centered response to those impacted by domestic
abuse. Their men’s intervention group is “g5.” Help[H]er is a nonprofit
founded by a PCA member that offers training and resources for structuring a
women-to-women in crisis advocacy ministry in the local church
(helpherresources.com). An advocate can listen to a victim’s story, accompany
her to associated ecclesiastical proceedings, meet, and pray with her.

*[Editor’s Note: These resources were current at the time of publication.]



   146
        See Gladwell’s extensive treatment of the research done by Psychologist Tim
Levine in “Default to Truth,” Malcolm Gladwell, Talking to Strangers (New York:
Little, Brown and Company, 2019), 57.
                                       1082
                                    APPENDIX V



Involve the Victim: It is important to get feedback from the victim while
shepherding the abuser. Overstating improvements while minimizing poor
gains is common for an abuser. The victim can help inform the Session of
persistent behaviors in the home and help direct counsel toward unrepentant
and/or unchanged abusive patterns. Our proclivity to prefer good news
necessitates consistent communication with the victim to monitor real change.

Separation: Often, the abuser must be separated from the family. He will need
encouragement and accountability during this time. He must also recognize his
need for help as he will not fully understand his own heart. He will want the
process to go much faster. Enlist the care of the deacons for practical needs.

Minister to the Congregation: An abuser may be well-respected and have
many good relationships with other members in the church. The accusations
against him may be very confusing to these people. It is hard to fathom that a
man who may also be a golfing or fishing buddy could be abusive in the home.
We want to think well of one another. Be prepared to neutralize an abuser’s
PR campaign to undermine the church’s process. Include any of these
relationships when possible by enlisting their help to walk alongside the abuser
for his encouragement and benefit.

DARVO147: As an abuser begins to understand “the what” and “the why” of his
abuse, it is very common for him to use this information against his spouse.
Many victims are accused of abuse by their abusers. Abusers can take the
phrases and concepts they learn and turn them onto the victim. Educate church
leaders regarding the difference between patterns of abuse, or the inconsistent
characteristics of a victim who is responding to the weighty injustices of abuse.

Question Very Specifically: Abusers minimize behaviors. Victims also
minimize their abuser’s behaviors. Follow up on responses to questions and
ask for more detail. Become skilled in asking multiple questions from many
angles to comprehend a fuller picture. An abuser may tell you that he got “a
little angry” but not that he choked the victim until she passed out. The victim
may also say “he got a little angry.” Good questions will help the victim
provide a more accurate picture of what is happening in the home. Ask
questions like, “Describe what happened when he got angry” rather than
simple yes or no questions. It is unsafe for the victim’s abuser to be present
when asking these questions. It is also recommended to have a female advocate
present.


   147
         “Deny, Attack, Reverse Victim and Offender.
                                        1083
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




Boundaries: Strictly adhere to any boundaries you set, including meeting
times. Abusers push boundaries (just as they do when coercively controlling
in the home) and they always have a good reason for why. “I’m so sorry I ran
late, traffic was heavy.” “I know you said I wasn’t to text her, but her aunt
really needed to contact her.” This is a continuation of the power play used by
an abuser to gain a perceived loss of their control. Control is the issue in the
relationship. Control will be the issue in shepherding as well. Limit when he
can call those who are helping him. The shepherding team and Session are not
at his disposal.

Put On (Duties): Create an action list for the abuser to complete in
coordination with the victim. Deeds are far more important than words when
shepherding an abuser. Actions might include . . .

        •   put off all abusive behaviors,
        •   attend a BIP,
        •   meet weekly with an elder for accountability,
        •   continue financial support of his family,
        •   adhere to communication restrictions.

Spiritual Abuse: Recognize that abusers will use Scripture as a means for
justifying their abuse. Teach a biblical view of marriage and family. Help the
abuser see how his sin has affected others. Encourage “particular” repentance
for “particular” sins (WCF XV. 5) and for sinful thinking he has chosen to
believe.

Genuine Forgiveness: Abusers may use their apology to block further
conversation. “I said I was sorry. You have to forgive me and not bring it up
again.” True repentance is seen in a willingness to accept the consequences
and to change actions.

Beyond the Basics

        •   Encourage effort; however, abusers will want to be rewarded for
            good behavior. Remind them we do not deserve special privileges
            for simply doing the right thing (Luke 17:10).
        •   Clearly point out when the abuser has minimized, denied, or
            justified his actions.
        •   Clearly point out when the abuser shifts blame for his actions to
            the victim or others.
                                     1084
                                APPENDIX V



       •   Discourage self-pity. He may feel like the victim, especially if his
           feelings are hurt as a consequence of what he has done.
       •   Encourage the abuser to cease his sinful actions immediately and
           repent.
       •   Hold the abuser responsible. People choose to abuse; they are not
           compelled.
       •   Encourage the abuser to take responsibility for his sinful actions.

What Not To Do

       •   A classic mistake in shepherding of any kind is to focus on
           behavior alone, which only addresses the surface of the problem.
           To address the problem at its root, focus on the heart. This is no
           less true for abusers than for any other human being.
       •   Anger management courses are not very effective for domestic
           abuse. Anger is a tool the abuser uses, not an underlying cause.
           Anger is a means to get what he wants.
       •   Treating abuse as a marriage problem falsely assumes that one of
           the reasons he is abusive is because of her behavior.
       •   Marriage counseling is dangerous for the victim. The pastor or
           counselor does not know what happens once the couple leaves the
           office. The victim will be afraid to disclose what is happening
           behind closed doors in the home for fear of further abuse.
       •   Be very cautious in choosing to support the abuser in court.

Prevention and Deterrence

The most effective way to prevent and deter domestic abuse is to create a
church culture that names the abuse from the Scriptures and condemns it as
evil. Addressing the topic of domestic violence and oppression openly
normalizes the discussion and abnormalizes the behavior.
The following are meant to be thorough, however, are not exhaustive.

       Preach from the pulpit about domestic abuse and oppression.

       •   Galatians 5:20 ‒ “outbursts of anger” in the marriage relationship
       •   Ephesians 4:29 ‒ on verbal and emotional abuse
       •   The “one another” and “each other” passages (Acts 1:14; 2:44)
       •   The heart of abuse (Matt. 12:34-36; Luke 6:43-46)


                                    1085
           MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



•   The passages that articulate a culture of grace in relationships
    (Phil. 2:4-5; Eph. 4:1-16)
•   A biblical perspective of power, sacrifice, and servant leadership
    (Matt. 26:53-54; Prov. 18:12; Eph. 4:1-3)

Periodically study the topic of domestic abuse in small groups:

•   Descriptions of what it looks, sounds, and feels like;
•   The emotional, physical, and spiritual impact on the spouse,
    children, and the abuse;
•   Study books on marriage and on domestic abuse.

Other Ideas:

•   Provide opportunities to hear the testimonies of men and women
    who have been involved in domestic abuse situations.
•   Offer instruction on how to handle conflict and build relationship
    skills.
•   Connect deacons and/or specific small groups with domestic
    violence organizations in the community for training and for
    resources for victims and their children.
•   Beginning in middle school, teach respectful ways to treat others
    in relationship from a biblical framework.
•   Train youth leaders to recognize red flags in high school dating
    relationships. Teach the youth biblical principles for marriage.
•   Teach men and women in small groups, men’s and women’s
    ministries, and/or discipleship relationships biblical principles for
    parenting sons and daughters with the goal of respecting how God
    created them as individual image-bearers.
•   Develop a diverse multi-voice church position paper on domestic
    abuse and oppression supported by the elders and distributed to
    the congregation, every successive membership class, and staff
    hires. Clearly state the definitions of the tactics of abuse, the
    dynamic of such abuse (power and control), and the steps the
    Session will take in the event of an occurrence of domestic abuse,
    no matter who the abuser is.




                             1086
                                    APPENDIX V



         •   Develop companion position papers on topics such as separation
             and divorce and the sanctity148 of human life.

7. Case Study

Liz

Liz heard an alarm clock going off somewhere, “WA, WA, WA,” why didn’t
anyone else hear it? The bride at the front of the church (her daughter) must
not have heard it because she didn’t skip a beat in repeating her vows or
exclaiming, “I do!” Her daughter’s obvious enthusiasm created a murmur of
laughter throughout the sanctuary. The couple at the altar were obviously in
love and in a hurry to be married. Every person in the church sensed their
excitement. No one in the church heard the alarm.

Liz was so distracted. She felt her heart race, and her palms were wet. For the
life of her she couldn’t figure out why no one else was bothered by the sound
of the annoying alarm clock, “WA, WA, WA.” She strained her neck forward
in order to hear where the sound was coming from. Suddenly, Liz found it
difficult to swallow. She heard the pastor read, “Love is patient, love is kind . . .”

The last thing she remembers was the look on her daughter’s face as Liz bolted
toward the nearest exit, crying hysterically.

The church Liz attends is a small PCA congregation in the southernmost tip of
the Bible belt. She’s been there for over five years and is a member in good
standing. Liz obviously struggles with depression; her physician also
diagnosed PTSD. Liz flinches any time a man raises his voice or appears
agitated. Her pastor, a compassionate man with a shepherd’s heart, tries to
help, but he doesn’t know how. Liz’s “issues” are well-known by fellow
church members. No one really knows how to help.

What the little body of believers doesn’t know is that one morning ten years
ago, Liz’s husband threatened to kill her while yelling “GET OUT of my house
before I hurt you!” He had shoved her out the front door into the cold in her
nightgown and told her he was going to kill the pets. The congregation has no

   148
       Consistency is needed in the church culture between defending the unborn
against the hand of the abortionist and women and children against the hand of an
abuser in the home.


                                        1087
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



clue it was the last day Liz endured her husband’s assaults; they don’t know
she got a restraining order. They didn’t know he moved his mistress into the
house after kicking Liz to the curb. They didn’t know Liz is actually who paid
for the house.

Liz’s brothers and sisters in Christ don’t know that years of verbal, emotional,
spiritual, and sexual abuse continue to flood her memories, or that she finds it
difficult to forget her husband’s accusation on their wedding night that she
wasn’t a virgin (she was). They don’t know about the day he got in her face
and bellowed allegations that she refused his sexual advances because she
didn’t want more children (she did), and then he “took what he wanted”
anyway. They didn’t hear the cruel words he said after they had sex.

They didn’t know how frequently her husband lied about where he was or what
he was doing. No one could have comprehended how Liz endured his tickling
her mercilessly even when she begged him to stop, or that he regularly
threatened suicide.

Her friends didn’t know that, for years, Liz questioned reality. Her constant
battle was to discern if she really was mistaken like her husband often told her.
They didn’t realize he called her “a witch, a [x]itch, and a harlot,” and told her
she was stubborn, rebellious, and disobedient. No one knew her husband
engrained in Liz’s mind that, “Marriage and slavery are analogous.” Her
friends didn’t realize the translation of that statement meant that—no matter
how her husband treated her or her body—her very life was in his hands. The
proof was when he shoved her into the wall before she left for work one
morning.

What no one would have been able to grasp is that Liz was willing to bear it
all for the sake of the vow she made before God, and the idea she might one
day save her husband. They couldn’t have comprehended that, with that kind
of marriage, Liz never wanted a divorce. They may have even asked why she
didn’t leave.

Brainstorming questions for help developing best practices:

        1. How many of the marriages in your church may be struggling due
           to abuse rather than normal marital conflict?
        2. How will you discern the difference?
        3. What are you doing to proactively find women like Liz in your
           church?
                                      1088
                                  APPENDIX V



        4. What structures and/or procedures should your church or ministry
           already have in place for domestic abuse?
        5. Do members know how to report abuse at your church and to
           whom?
        6. Do victims feel like your church is a safe place to report what’s
           happening privately in their home?
        7. How can you help victims of abuse or trauma?
        8. Who in your church is versed in abuse and trauma and
           compassionate to care for the victim and/or her family?


SECTION THREE: WOMEN WHO ABUSE

1. Introduction

A dominant person exerts power over those who are vulnerable to their care.
Anyone can abuse power and control by subjecting those at risk to threatening
circumstances. Both men and women may employ tactics for achieving this
goal of personal gain; however, studies confirm that women are
disproportionately affected.149 One in three women either have been in, or are
currently in, an abusive relationship.

The goal of the abuser is to use persons as objects for self-indulgence and/or
personal gain. Both women and men who abuse share multiple common
characteristics. Abusers, male and female, cross the line (self-centered sin to
self-worship/me over you150 sin), when they make another person pay for their
entitlements. And while both men and women are victims of abuse—
emotional and physical—and both men and women are perpetrators of abuse,
it is rare to openly discuss women who abuse.151 Statistics concerning women




    149
         National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey, National Data on
Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Violence, and Stalking, (Accessed November
2019),
    https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/nisvs-fact-sheet-2014.pdf .
    150
        Jeremy Pierre, Greg Wilson. When Home Hurts, A Guide for Responding Wisely
to Domestic Abuse in Your Church (Geanies House, Fearn, Ross-shire, Scotland:
Christian Focus Publications, 2021), 70.
    151
         Kimberly C. Taylor, Exposing the Abusive Female. Kindle Edition, (Self-
Published, 2014), 17.
                                      1089
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



who abuse are more likely related to the parent/child relationship rather than
abuse between partners.152

The difference between male and female domination includes a heightened
demonstration of physical/verbal/emotional abuse leading to greater fear. As
“complementarians” we acknowledge power differentiation between men and
women.153 We therefore must (simultaneously) acknowledge women are at a
higher risk of harm than men. “Women can be abusive and violent to their
male partners, but this is estimated to happen in less than five percent of cases
of domestic abuse.”154 One difficulty in identifying accurate statistics of
women who abuse is that male victims tend to have more shame and do not
come forward.

Regardless of gender, abuse is a human issue, but more importantly abuse is a
spiritual issue. At the core of abuse is the fact that the abuser has lost sight of
their love and faithfulness to God. It is from within this void that evil actions
find life. In Hosea 7:6 we read, “For with hearts like an oven they approach
their intrigue; all night their anger smolders; in the morning it blazes like a
flaming fire.” This is “an image of the heat of anger which burns in their hearts,
which, being craftily concealed, does not at first make itself manifest, but
which grows only the more surely, and at last breaks out in deeds of
violence.”155 The heart of the problem is the heart disposition. It is a heart
shaped by evil.

Brad Hambrick, in his book The Self-Centered Spouse,156 writes there are two
kinds of abusers: passive and/or aggressive. He gets this idea from Matthew
7:6, “Do not give dogs what is holy, and do not throw your pearls before pigs,
lest they trample them underfoot and turn to attack you.” Hambrick writes,

   152
          Child Maltreatment, Facts at a Glance, (Accessed March 2022),
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/childmaltreatment-facts-at-a glance.pdf.
    153
        See also page 959 in the discussion of WLC 151 on Aggravations That Make
Sins More Heinous.
    154
        Joanne Belknap and Heather Melton, Are Heterosexual Men Also Victims of
Intimate Partner Violence? (Harrisburg, PA: National Resource Center on Domestic
Violence, 2005), https://vawnet.org/material/are-heterosexual-men-also-victims-
intimate-partner-abuse, as quoted in Darby Strickland, Is it Abuse? A Biblical Guide
to Identifying Domestic Abuse and Helping Victims (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R
Publishing, 2020), 17.
    155
        J. P. Lange, P. Schaff, O. Schmoller & J. F. McCurdy, A Commentary on the
Holy Scriptures: Hosea (Bellingham, WA: Logos Bible Software, 2008), 68.
    156
         Brad Hambrick, The Self-Centered Spouse, Help for Chronically Broken
Marriages (Phillipsburg, PA: P&R Publishing, 2014), 10.
                                       1090
                                  APPENDIX V



         The distinction between levels of aggression can be seen in the
         animals chosen—wild dogs are aggressive animals and pigs
         are almost universally viewed as passive and lazy. Using the
         verb trample for pigs might not seem to have a connotation of
         passivity until one considers how trampling would be involved
         in the normal activity of pigs. Pigs trample many things, but
         not in the wild stampede of a heard of buffalo; rather, they do
         so by walking over things as part of their daily routine.157

Aggression isn’t the only type of abuse. In order to have a category for female
abusers, it must be recognized and acknowledged that passive abuse is abusive.
“One reason among many for the absence of consensus on the relative use of
violence by men versus women is that measurement of violent acts alone does
not adequately characterize violence in intimate partner relationships”158
(emphasis provided).

Passive abuse as articulated by Hambrick includes but is not limited to . . .

         •   Avoids interaction until backed into a corner,
         •   Idiosyncratic (peculiar) interpretations of actions, emotions, or
             conflict,
         •   Complains that too much is asked of them,
         •   Labels spouse as too demanding,
         •   Makes every request a big deal,
         •   Sees their own area of neglect as normal,
         •   Enjoys being cared for,
         •   Resents feeling parented,
         •   Immature,
         •   Apathetic,
         •   Sense of entitlement,
         •   “I’m sorry I can’t be who you want me to be,”
         •   Answers questions with questions (providing hope the target
             might be heard,)
         •   Returns questions, changes the subject, condemns, blame shifts
             (“but what about when you . . .?”),


   157
       Ibid.
   158
        Mary Ann Dutton and Lisa A. Goodman, “Coercion in Intimate Partner
Violence: Toward a New Conceptualization, Sex Roles,” ResearchGate, Vol. 52, Nos.
11/12, June 2005, 744.
                                      1091
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           •    Condescension (arrogance) toward those with whom the abuser
                disagrees.

Both male and female abusers coercively control their targets by linking a
demand (spoken and/or unspoken, a.k.a., “the look”) with a credible threat of
negative consequences for non-compliance.159

Women and men may differ in their ability to convey a credible threat, but
they may differ less in their use of verbal insults or statements of
humiliation.160 This is important because, while women may not use physical
tactics, they can easily employ power tactics of coercive control.

Abuse of power involves . . .

           •    Coercive power involves the abuser’s ability to impose on the
                abused things the abused does not desire or to remove or decrease
                desired things.
           •    Reward power involves the abuser’s ability to give to the abused
                things the abused desires or take away or decrease things.
                o EX: Give “permission” (to see friends, family members) or
                    spend money.
                o EX: Take away freedom (isolate), or conversation (using
                    silent treatment).
                o EX: Sex
           •    Legitimate power involves the abuser’s ability to impose on the
                abused feelings of obligation or responsibility.
                o EX: “You don’t love me if . . .” or “If you loved me, you
                    would . . .”
           •    Referent power involves the abuser’s ability to provide feelings
                of personal acceptance or approval based on the victim’s
                identification with the agent/ability to influence because of the
                respect, admiration, and personal identification with the abuser.
                o EX: Wearing hair a certain way, dressing a certain way,
                    socializing, spending free time (all in a way that is desirable
                    to the abuser but not so much to the abused).
           •    Expert power involves the abuser’s ability to provide skill or
                expertise and arises from the victim’s belief that they have no such
                expertise.
                o EX: Financial prowess.

   159
         Ibid., 747.
   160
         Ibid., 746.
                                         1092
                                      APPENDIX V



             •    Informational power involves the abuser’s ability to provide
                  knowledge or information necessary for the victim’s well-being.
                  o EX: Physical/illness/taking (the right) pills on time.161

The victim’s response to coercion does involve choice although not free
choice. The abused has two basic choices:

             1. Compliance ‒ the abused can choose to comply and hope to avoid
             threatened negative consequences. For instance, coercive power is
             based on the victim’s belief that the victim can and will experience
             negative consequences for noncompliance.
or
         2. Resistance ‒ risk punishment.
Another power tactic is called “setting the stage.”162 It is a type of coercion
that softens the abused by setting a stage where the abuser demonstrates to the
abused that he or she has the means to exert coercion and is ready and willing
to pay any associated costs.

Setting the stage is meant to . . .

             •    Create the expectancy of negative consequences,
             •    Create or exploit the partner’s vulnerabilities,
             •    Wear down the partner’s resistance, and/or
             •    Facilitate attachment.

Setting the stage creates the expectancy of negative consequences. It
communicates the ability, willingness, and readiness to control one’s partner
by punishing and withholding. This can be done by way of explicit statements
like, “If you don’t, I will make sure . . .” or it can be done with implicit
statements, as in “the look.” These tactics might be utilized in an instant or
cumulatively over the course of the relationship. The impact is such, however,
that one instance is enough to set the stage and control all future instances.

Creating vulnerability is very important especially for female-on-male abuse.
It may include (but not be limited to) . . .

             •    The economic:
                  o The woman makes more money and feels entitled to control
                     the finances.

     161
           Ibid., 745.
     162
           Ibid., 745.
                                          1093
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        •    The physical:
             o Controlling the spouse who has an illness
             o If the male spouse is unable to work
             o With an elderly spouse, the abuser withholds meds or neglects
                physical needs.
             o Wear down the partner's resistance
             o Deplete resources (economic or emotional support)
             o The most effective physical exploitation is sleep
                deprivation.163
        •    Exploitation of mental health problems:
             o Same type of exploitation as physical illness
             o The victim may have existing vulnerabilities, such as a history
                of childhood abuse.

2. Biblical Examples

Delilah ‒ Judges 16:5-22

“And the lords of the Philistines came up to her and said to her, ‘Seduce him,
and see where his great strength lies, and by what means we may overpower
him, that we may bind him to humble him. And we will each give you 1,100
pieces of silver’” (v. 5). In this story, the greed that benefits self (self-worship)
is a characteristic of those who abuse. Scripture itself shows us the type of
abuse Delilah employed:

        •    “Now she had men lying in ambush in an inner chamber. And she
             said to him, ‘The Philistines are upon you, Samson!’” (v. 9).
        •    “So Delilah took new ropes and bound him with them and said to
             him, ‘The Philistines are upon you, Samson!’” (v. 12).
        •    “Then Delilah said to Samson, ‘Until now you have mocked me
             and told me lies. Tell me how you might be bound.’” . . . “The
             Philistines are upon you, Samson!” (v. 14).
        •    “And she said to him, ‘How can you say, “I love you,” when your
             heart is not with me? You have mocked me these three times, and
             you have not told me where your great strength lies.’ And when
             she pressed him hard with her words day after day, and urged
             him, his soul was vexed to death. And he told her all his heart”
             (vv. 15-17).

  163
      Malcolm Gladwell, Talking with Strangers (New York, NY: Little, Brown and
Company, 2019), 259.
                                        1094
                                 APPENDIX V



        •   “When Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and
            called the lords of the Philistines, saying, ‘Come up again, for he
            has told me all his heart.’ Then the lords of the Philistines came
            up to her and brought the money in their hands. She made him
            sleep on her knees. And she called a man and had him shave off
            the seven locks of his head. Then she began to torment him, and
            his strength left him. And she said, ‘The Philistines are upon
            you, Samson!’” (vv. 18-20).
        •   “She made him sleep on her knees. And she called a man and had
            him shave off the seven locks of his head. Then she began to
            torment him, and his strength left him” (v. 19).

Scripture identifies Delilah abused Samson in verse 19: “torment.”

Michal ‒ 1 Samuel 18:17-26; 25:44; 2 Samuel 3:12-16; 6:16-23

        •   “It pleased Saul to give David his daughter” (1 Sam. 18:17-26).
        •   Michal then given by Saul to Paltiel (1 Sam. 25:44).
        •   David sent for Michal, and Paltiel followed weeping after her (2
            Sam. 3:12-16).
        •   Ark comes back to the city of David (2 Sam. 6:16-23).
            o Michal sees David leaping and dancing before the Lord and
                 she despised him in her heart (v. 18).
            o And David returned to bless his household. But Michal the
                 daughter of Saul came out to meet David and said, “How the
                 king of Israel honored himself today, uncovering himself
                 today before the eyes of his servants’ female servants, as one
                 of the vulgar fellows shamelessly uncovers himself!” (v. 20).

Michal showed disgust, was mocking and belittling. Michal was a hurt woman
(though, not an excuse). We can see in this story an example of hurting people
hurt people. Often, both abusers and their victims are suffering from traumatic
events. Yet, while Michal used abusive words and actions to taunt her husband,
David’s power differential ultimately dictated Michal’s demise: “And Michal
the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of her death” (2 Sam. 6:23).

Herodias ‒ Matthew 14:1-12

        “For Herod had seized John and bound him and put him in prison for
        the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, because John had been
        saying to him, “It is not lawful for you to have her” (vv. 3-4).
                                     1095
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



This tells us something about characteristics of an abusive wife.

        •   Herodias had something she wanted (the king, royal life, all the
            perks).
        •   She wasn’t willing to give up those things.
        •   She wasn’t going to let anyone tell her what to do (i.e., John the
            Baptist).
        •   She diminished John as a person. She was the queen. What did she
            care about a man in the wilderness who “wore a garment of
            camel’s hair and a leather belt around his waist, and his food was
            locusts and wild honey” (Matt. 3:4)?
        •   This shows how abusers have no categories for disagreement.

This story tells us something about a husband as well (albeit not justification
for abuse).

        •   For the sake of Herodias (v. 3)
            o Vulnerability—he would do anything for the sake of his wife.
        •   And though he wanted to put him to death, he feared the people,
            because they held him to be a prophet (v. 5).
            o Vulnerability—the king feared “man.”
        •   But when Herod’s birthday came, the daughter of Herodias
            danced before the company and pleased Herod, so that he
            promised with an oath to give her whatever she might ask (vv. 6-
            7).
            o Vulnerability —the king had a weakness for women.
        •   And the king was sorry, but because of his oaths and his guests he
            commanded it to be given (v. 9).
            o Vulnerability—the king’s fear of man.

Modern Examples/Characteristics

The following represent potential exacting behaviors that women may use to
abuse. This is not an all-inclusive, comprehensive list, nor are all of the
characteristics always indicative of abuse. In detecting whether or not the
relationship is abusive, we look for patterns.

        •   Blame shifting
               o “But don’t you see how your actions made me do this?”
               o “As a Christian, I would think that you would assume the
                   best of me.”
                                     1096
                         APPENDIX V



        o     “If you would just man up, I wouldn’t have to tell you
              what to do!”
•   Self-pity
         o “I’m just so misunderstood.”
         o “You’re so mean for making me feel bad about myself.”
         o “You have it easy; you have no right to ask that of me.”
         o “Can’t you appreciate me?”
•   Allows for no questioning; cries “abuse” when confronted with a
    question.
•   Has double standards:
         o One standard for herself.
                   ▪ EX: Does not need to stay on a budget or keep
                       clothes tidy
                   ▪ EX: Explodes when his laundry is not put away
                       or he spends money on himself
         o One standard for everybody else
•   Views any suggestion that maybe she is in the wrong as an attack
    on her person.
         o “You have some nerve telling me how to parent. All you
              ever do is indulge the kids!”
•   Has punishing behaviors
         o Silent treatment prolonged
         o Withholding sex
         o Purposely embarrasses
         o Breaks his things
•   Re-writes the narrative so that it features her as the victim, no
    matter what her actions actually were in the scenario
•   Is fond of saying, “We’re ALL sinners” —but not in a sense of
    sorrow or humility, but more of, “Don’t you dare judge me.”
•   Only assigns herself the very best motives, no matter the evidence
    to the contrary.
•   Is truly shocked that others don’t also assign the very best motives
    to her actions.
•   Apologizes in a way that actually finds fault with the other person;
         o “I’m sorry if you thought I was doing that; I wasn’t doing
              that, I was trying to do something nice for you because
              you are hard to please and I get anxious,”—however, not
              much evidence of real anxiety on her part.
•   Very concerned about how people view her, less concerned about
    actual consequences of her actions

                             1097
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        •   Inability to let go of things in the past for which she supposedly
            already granted forgiveness
        •   Brings up past sins committed against her, including those for
            which she offered forgiveness
        •   Uses past failures against him
        •   Shames him for his past
        •   Holds unforgiveness over someone’s head and uses it as a
            bargaining chip for getting what she wants
        •   Very manipulative—tries to “sell” you on something she wants by
            attempting to convince you that it is what YOU want, and she’s
            just doing it for you
        •   Gets angry or sullen when there is pushback
        •   Does kind things for others but gets very upset when similar things
            are not done in return
        •   Often communicates her lifelong disappointment that he isn’t in
            the career she wants him to be in, with the level of financial
            security she wants
        •   Very unsupportive of his decisions
        •   A very discontented person in general
        •   Tendency toward jealousy
        •   Very controlling
        •   Micromanages the details of her children’s and husband’s plans
        •   Speaks to the husband in a condescending way as if he is a child
        •   Truly believes that she is being gracious toward her husband
        •   Says she wants her husband to lead in the home, but when he tries,
            unless it is to her specifications, she communicates her deep
            disappointment in his attempts through body language, indirect
            comments, etc.
        •   She places a burden of “make me happy or else” on her husband
        •   There is a strong undercurrent of unease in their home, centered
            around her

Many abusive men can make false claims that their wife is the abuser. One
helpful way to discern victims from someone simply claiming they are is to
consider the effect of their actions. True male victims present in the same way
female victims do. They are afraid and feel the weight of wrongly placed guilt;
they under-report, and they appear confused and/or uncertain. Abuse is as
confusing for men as it is for women.



                                     1098
                                 APPENDIX V



A second way to interact with claims of abuse is to seek out details of the
relationship. This will help determine if this was a global accusation (but the
details don’t rise to the level of abuse), an incident of resistance (wife
protecting herself from abuse), or part of a long-standing pattern of coercive
control.

3. Abuse? Or a Response to Abuse?

Women who abuse may, like men, use aggression and or violence as a tactic
to abuse. But often female victims use violence to get the abuse to stop. A
woman’s use of violence largely involves self-defense or fighting back.164
Often, these women will use weapons in order to overcome the power
differential. It is very difficult to discern between a woman who abuses and a
woman responding to abuse. It is not uncommon for a male abuser to claim he
is the victim in these situations. Enlisting help from those who have spent
considerable time working with abuse victims and survivors—victim
advocates and/or third party, trained investigators—will help rule out false
reports.

Fighting back is a natural response to injustice. Spurgeon writes,

         We do well when we are angry with sin, because of the wrong
         which it commits against our good and gracious God; or with
         ourselves because we remain so foolish after so much divine
         instruction; or with others when the sole cause of anger is the
         evil which they do. He who is not angry at transgression
         becomes a partaker in it. Sin is a loathsome and hateful thing,
         and no renewed heart can patiently endure it. God Himself is
         angry with the wicked every day, and it is written in His Word,
         “Ye that love the Lord, hate evil.”165

What are some symptoms an abused woman will exhibit that can bring a
misdiagnosis of her as the abuser? The following list is not exhaustive, and not


   164
        Mary Ann Dutton and Lisa A. Goodman, “Coercion in Intimate Partner
Violence: Toward a New Conceptualization, Sex Roles,” ResearchGate, Vol. 52,
Nos. 11/12, June 2005.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227252624_Coercion_in_Intimate_Partner
_Violence_Toward_a_New_Conceptualization
    165
        C. H. Spurgeon. Morning and Evening: Daily Readings (London: Passmore &
Alabaster, 1896) Morning, July 13.
                                      1099
                      MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



all characteristics are indicative of abuse. Investigating abuse means looking
for patterns.

         •   Socially isolated/withdrawn
         •   Poor impulse control (yells, screams, throws things)
         •   Low self-worth
         •   Readily takes ownership of her faults
         •   Depressed or even suicidal
         •   Angry and fearful at the same time
         •   Denies the seriousness of problems in marriage; realization may
             evolve over time.166
         •   May be apathetic, low motivation
         •   May have nervous habits
         •   May have poor hygiene
         •   Talks negatively about self or life in general
         •   Embarrassed about her situation (shame) because it reflects on her
             worth as a woman/wife
         •   Overly apologetic
         •   Victims enter victim relationships. Previous abuse makes them
             good targets because vulnerability is built in—susceptible to
             grooming.
         •   Protects, defends, explains the abuser
         •   Denies abuse
         •   Refuses to admit or firmly believes abuse won’t continue to
             happen
         •   Speaks in terms of “accidents” (“he didn’t mean . . . he doesn’t . .
             .”)
         •   Changes mind frequently
         •   Extreme privacy
         •   Effective liars (shaped by evil). They have to lie to protect (home,
             self, children) and keep peace
             o Withholds information
             o Rationalization



   166
       “And Jesus took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village, and
when He had spit on his eyes and laid His hands on him, he asked him, ‘Do you see
anything?’ And he looked up and said, ‘I see people, but they look like trees, walking.’
Then Jesus laid His hands on his eyes again; and he opened his eyes, his sight was
restored, and he saw everything clearly” (Mark 8:23-25).
                                         1100
                                 APPENDIX V



        •   Belligerent (especially to other authority figures, i.e., police,
            church leadership)
        •   Speaks poorly about, complains, or disrespects her abusive
            husband
        •   Or, conversely, submissive
        •   Considers herself responsible, “over owns”
        •   High expectations of self/maximizes responsibility
        •   Minimizes situations
        •   Guilt
        •   Untrusting of others
        •   Feels insane (Asks, “Is this normal?” looks for constant
            affirmation)
        •   Difficulty making decisions
        •   Difficulty articulating
            o Hyper vigilance creates an atmosphere which makes it
                 difficult to concentrate on anything but the abuser and their
                 well being
        •   Anorexic (or other controlling behaviors)
        •   Unbalanced (always questioning)
        •   Nervous/anxious
        •   May not readily converse with opposite sex
        •   Protective of home life (Do other kids come over?)
        •   Fear of “man” and/or fear of men
        •   Controlling (which makes identifying abuse difficult)
            o Grasping at straws, they feel out of control, so they seek any
                 other way to control.
            o This is most often seen with mothers’ relationships to their
                 children or any other authoritative relationship, i.e., younger
                 siblings, employees for instance.

The traumatic responses of a victim to the effects of abuse are not responses
to normal marital issues. Their marriage is not normal. It’s almost impossible
to know a victim’s sin issues when her world revolves around protecting
herself and her children.




                                     1101
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



4. Case Study

Natalie

Natalie backed the minivan out of the driveway . . . a little too fast. She had to
swerve to miss the mailbox. Natalie and the kids were late for Sunday school,
so she was driving erratically.
The kids flinched when the van jerked, but they didn’t dare mention it or
respond with any show of fear. They knew better. “I’m. SO. Grrrr . . .” the kids
heard their mom spew more than speak.

Moments before they left the house, Natalie and Mike had been fighting.
Again. Mike worked the late shift Friday and Saturday night after his day job.
At 8:30 a.m., he was still asleep, so Natalie had to get the three kids (ages 2,
4, and 6) bathed, fed, and ready for church by herself. She was not happy. “I.
DO. NOT. DESERVE. THIS,” she murmured, and turned down the street
toward the church.

The fighting began that morning like usual. It started with Natalie’s silence.
She wasn’t silent because she didn’t want to wake Mike—more so because she
was seething inside. She had taken care of the kids by herself all weekend and
she was done! She needed Mike to get up, act like a man, and participate in the
family as a father should. But Mike was still sleeping. The kids were watching
cartoons in their pajamas, eating bowls of dry Fruit Loops with marshmallows.
Natalie had told the oldest to prepare his siblings’ breakfast. The cereal and
marshmallows were all he could find. Natalie contemplated her next steps.

When the silent period ended, the kids knew to go to their rooms. Even the
two-year-old wanted to be out of hearing distance from the yelling. “YOU
JERK!” they heard from the “safety” of their bedrooms. Natalie was standing
over Mike as he lay in their bed. She had ripped the sheets and blankets off his
body, jerked the shades off the windows to let in the sunlight, and screamed at
the top of her lungs. “I CAN’T BELIEVE YOU’RE STILL IN BED WHEN
THE KIDS NEED A BATH AND I NEED TO GET TO CHURCH.” Natalie
was on the nursery schedule; she had told Mike earlier in the week. She never
reminded him, but she expected him to remember and be available when called
on to help.

Mike had had a total of four hours of sleep between Thursday night and
Sunday. He was definitely sleep deprived. He worked two jobs just to keep up
with the bills. Mike had gone to seminary but never found a calling. He drove
                                      1102
                                  APPENDIX V



a UPS truck during the day and cleaned the local middle school building on
weekend nights. Natalie constantly complained to Mike she couldn’t continue
to live with his schedule. She blamed him for not getting the job when he
applied for a pastoral position. She told Mike his “humility” (his word—
Natalie called it weakness) came off pathetic. Who would hire a man like that
for their pastor? She wouldn’t forgive him for giving up and settling for
random part-time jobs.

Sometimes Mike would fight back. He would tell Natalie he’d fully support
her if she wanted to get a job. Natalie would just sneer and say, “Are you
kidding? Are YOU going to take care of the kids and get them to school and
appointments? I have enough on my plate with Bible study and Life Group
and my discipleship relationships! Are you going to tell me that, just because
YOU can’t get a job in ministry, I have to ignore God’s calling for ME? If you
loved me, you’d find a better job that would allow you to be the husband and
father you were meant to be!”

It didn’t seem to matter to Natalie that Mike typically stopped at the grocery
store on his way home from work, or that he was the one to start the crockpot
with dinner before he left to pick up his UPS load in the morning. Natalie had
fallen asleep watching a movie the night before this latest blow up, so she
didn’t see Mike read the kids a story and tuck them into bed. Nothing Mike
did was good enough. The mood in the home was one of general discontent,
and the center of that unhappiness evolved around Natalie.

Natalie’s demeanor calmed as she pulled into the church parking lot. She put
on her “Sunday face” and delivered each of the older kids to their Sunday
school class. By the time she got to the nursery with her two-year-old in tow,
she was late. “I’m soooo sorry,” she told the children’s director. “I just wanted
to make sure my kids’ classes didn’t need any help because I know how you
hate when they’re short-handed. I was so anxious to make sure all was right
according to your meticulous standards!” A toddler climbed up on the small
plastic chair next to Natalie and started to teeter. The director called out to
Natalie, “Catch him!” Natalie turned toward the child and stepped back. The
boy hit the floor hard, headfirst. Natalie’s version of rescue was to pick up the
crying child by his ankle and deposit him into the lap of another worker. When
confronted, Natalie smiled and said, “I’m sorry! I can’t always be perfect! You
know, you were right here too! I’m not as strong as you and besides, if that
boy’s mom had taught him better, it would never have happened.”



                                      1103
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Brainstorming questions for help developing best practices:

        1. What are some of the differences between a woman who is
           abusive, and a woman responding to abuse?
        2. How will you discern the difference?
        3. Do your church volunteers know how to report “concerning”
           situations? Do they know what constitutes something “concerning?”
        4. Are your children’s ministry workers trained to identify children
           at risk? How often does training take place?
        5. If a man in your church had an abusive wife, who could he feel
           safe to talk about it with?
        6. If a woman in your church reports another woman with exacting
           behaviors toward her, what would some action steps look like?


SECTION FOUR: ADULT SEXUAL ABUSE167

1. Summary Description of Sexual Abuse

There are few more egregious acts of oppressive behavior than abusing another
person sexually.

Sexual abuse includes harassment, assault, and/or rape. “Sexual harassment”
is a form of sex discrimination prohibited by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964. It consists of inappropriate verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature that has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an
individual’s sense of well-being by creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive environment from the viewpoint of the affected individual.168
“Assault” is any type of sexual behavior or contact where consent is not freely
given or obtained. It is accomplished through force, intimidation, violence,


    167
        This section of the report will reference three works (quoted with permission
by the publishers).
     • Diane Mandt Langberg, Counseling Survivors of Sexual Abuse (Wheaton,
          IL: Tyndale House Publishers, 1997).
     • Diane Mandt Langberg, The Spiritual Impact of Sexual Abuse (Greensboro,
          NC: New Growth Press, 2017).
     • Andrew J. Schmutzer, ed., The Long Journey Home: Understanding and
          Ministering to the Sexually Abused (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2011).
    168
        Justin S. Holcomb, “Abuse and the Church: Types of Abuse” (PowerPoint
presentation, Reformed Theological Seminary, 2020). Retrieved from RTS Instructure.
                                        1104
                                   APPENDIX V



coercion, manipulation, threat, deception, or abuse of authority.169 “Adult
rape” is, “The penetration, no matter how slight, of the vagina or anus with
any body part or object, or oral penetration by a sex organ of another person,
without the consent of the victim.”170

According to the Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network, one out of every
six American women has been the victim of an attempted or completed rape
in her lifetime (14.8% completed, 2.8% attempted). About 3% of American
men—or 1 in 33—have experienced an attempted or completed rape in their
lifetime.171

2. Expressing God’s Heart

Dr. Langberg writes that knowing and understanding God’s response to evil
and suffering is necessary to “enter into” the survivor’s deep hurt. “The
essence of working with trauma survivors is about bearing witness to their
story and suffering, entering into their life, and demonstrating in the flesh the
heart of our God toward them and the evil they experienced.”172
In humility, as we recognize our own sinfulness and God’s extraordinary
grace, we will be
more careful in encouraging those who have experienced the horrific
destruction of sexual abuse. Hope is found for sufferers in God’s Word. The
Lord desires that His people protect the vulnerable. We will also recognize the
depth of depravity of the abuser, so we will form our response carefully to
them as well.

Sexual immorality deeply impacts the whole person, spiritually and
physically.173 Sexual abuse destroys both the inner and outer man. Paul teaches
in 1 Corinthians 6:18 that it is harmful to engage in consensual sexual
immorality; sexual abuse is a violent physical and spiritual act against another
person. It is what is described by God as oppression. In Genesis 34:2, we read

   169
        Holcomb, “Abuse and the Church.” Retrieved from RTS Instructure.
   170
         “An Updated Definition of Rape,” United States Department of Justice
Archives,      Office    of    Public    Affairs,    accessed   September     2021,
https://www.justice.gov/archives/opa/blog/updated-definition-rape.
    171
        “Statistics,” Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network (RAINN), accessed
September 16, 2021, https://www.rainn.org/statistics.
    172
        Langberg, Spiritual Impact of Sexual Abuse, 128.
    173
        1 Corinthians 6:18 (ESV) “Flee from sexual immorality. Every other sin a
person commits is outside the body, but the sexually immoral person sins against his
own body.”
                                       1105
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Shechem raped Dinah. Moses writes, he “seized” ( ‫ ) לָקַ ָח‬Dinah and
“humiliated” ( ‫ ) ָענָה‬her, otherwise interpreted as “oppressing” her.

The church must respond with God’s heart for those who suffered from sexual
abuse. We are called to proclaim to victims that our Lord is the stronghold for
the oppressed, and that He will continue to be a stronghold in times of trouble
(Ps. 9:9).

3. Recognition and Impacts of Sexual Abuse

Sexual assault is an exceptionally common experience of women (and many
men) in all societies. Victims silently populate the pews and sanctuaries of our
churches. Suffering from sexual assault and/or abuse generally creates
significant life-long behavioral, emotional, and medical problems, often
unrecognized and untreated. Surveys in the United States indicate that up to
one-fourth of women have been assaulted, some repeatedly, with 50 to 80% of
those assaults committed by a person known by the survivor.174

Sexual assault is stigmatizing, and only one-fourth of cases are reported to
authorities. Secrecy and shame create self-loathing, often due to the “rape-
myths” of the victims provoking the attack. Rape is the most common cause
of PTSD in women, and nearly half of men and women exposed to sexual
assault meet criteria for lifetime PTSD.175

Victims of sexual assault have a high prevalence of serious emotional and
physical issues including depression, anxiety, drug and/or alcohol abuse.
Victims and survivors may also be diagnosed with bipolar or personality
disorders because of impulsive and self-defeating behaviors. These more
severe manifestations are related to the severity and frequency of the
experience, use of weapons, the victim’s age at the time of the assault, and
social and economic resources.176

Unfortunately, when sexual abuse is disclosed to friends, family, or authorities,
revelation of assault may result in negative social consequences such as
blaming and/or shunning. Recovery and restoration depend upon prompt,


   174
        Helen Luce et al., “Sexual Assault of Women,” American Family Physician 81,
no. 4 (2010), 489-495.
    175
        Emily R. Dworkin et al., “Sexual Assault Victimization and Psychopathology:
A Review and Meta-analysis,” Clinical Psychology Review 56 (2017), 65-81.
    176
        Langberg, Counseling Survivors, 61-74.
                                       1106
                                    APPENDIX V



effective, empathetic, and sustained, multi-level care similar to the process for
the other forms of abuse.

Relationship Spheres

According to the Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network, an American is
sexually assaulted every nine minutes.177 The following are statistics gathered
by the Network in 2021 unless otherwise noted.

Marital
“Statistics reveal that sexual assault or forced sex occurs in approximately 40
to 45 percent of marriage relationships that have involved verbal or physical
violence. Marital rape occurs in 10 to 14 percent of all marriages. These
numbers should alarm us. And they should also cause us to ask why, if marital
sexual abuse is this prevalent, we do not hear more about it.”178

Authority
In an older survey by the Center for Prevention of Domestic and Sexual Abuse,
nearly thirteen percent of clergy said they had sex with a church member.179 In
another survey, approximately fourteen percent of ministers admitted to
engagement in sexual behavior that was considered to be inappropriate for a
minister.180

Acquaintance
Eight out of ten sexual assaults are committed by someone known to the
victim. Thirty-three percent of assaults are committed by a current or former
spouse, boyfriend, or girlfriend.

Caregiver
“People with disabilities are three times as likely to be sexually assaulted as
their peers without disabilities.”181

   177
        “Statistics,” RAINN.
   178
        Darby Strickland, Is It Abuse?: A Biblical Guide to Identifying Domestic Abuse
and Helping Victims (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2020), 160.
    179
        James Franklin, “Sex Abuse by Clergy Called Crisis for Church,” Boston Globe,
July 17, 1991.
    180
        Jeff T. Seat, James T. Trent, and Jwa K. Kim, “The Prevalence and Contributing
Factors of Sexual Misconduct among Southern Baptist Pastors in Six Southern States,”
Journal of Pastoral Care and Counseling 47, no. 4 (December 1993).
    181
         “Domestic Violence and People with Disabilities: What to Know, Why It
Matters, and How to Help,” National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (NCADV
                                        1107
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Stranger
Only nineteen percent of adult sexual assaults are committed by a complete
stranger.

Recognizing the Impacts of Sexual Abuse

There are numerous impacts on God’s image-bearers from sexual abuse.
According                                                                   to
Dr. Langberg, these after-effects are not decisive; however, they may indicate
sexual abuse has occurred.182

Emotional After-Effects:

        •   Anxiety attacks
        •   Phobias
        •   Depression
        •   Suicidal ideation
        •   Despair and hopelessness
        •   Pervasive dissatisfaction with life
        •   Emotional paralysis or numbness
        •   Anger difficulties
        •   Deep grief
        •   Self-blame
        •   Self-loathing
        •   “They will often use words like worthless, trash, or garbage when
            referring to themselves.”183
        •   Distorted body image
        •   Though longing for closeness, they may have a deep fear of
            intimacy or commitment.
        •   Adult survivors may “find it very difficult to trust others.”184

Physical After-Effects:

        •   Self-destructive tendencies
        •   Addictions to alcohol, food, spending, drugs, and sex
        •   Suicide ideation


blog), March 13, 2018, https://ncadv.org/blog /posts/domestic-violence-and-people-
with-disabilities.
   182
       Langberg, Counseling Survivors, 69-74.
   183
       Ibid., 70.
   184
       Ibid., 71.
                                      1108
                                   APPENDIX V



         •    Self-mutilation: “burning, cutting, self-bruising, biting, sticking
              oneself with pins, scratching, and beating oneself about the
              head”185
         •    Sexual dysfunctions
         •    Sexual orientation confusion
Spiritual After-Effects:

         •    Distorted image of God
         •    “God is often perceived to be punitive, an impossible taskmaster,
              capricious, impotent, indifferent, or dead.”186
         •    A “death of hope”187

Difficulty in Disclosure

When someone discloses sexual abuse, it is important to listen and act in a way
that supports the person and keeps him or her protected. God’s desire is that
we support those who have been abused (Matt. 19:13-15, Luke 17:2). While it
is the responsibility of law enforcement to investigate, in the moment of
disclosure or discovery the church must also provide care for the victim.
Why Victims of Sexual Abuse Do Not Disclose Abuse

         •    They may be instructed to keep the abuse a secret.
         •    They may be afraid to tell anyone.
         •    The abuser may have threatened them or their family.
         •    They may not know who is safe to tell.
         •    They might lack the language needed to capture what is happening
              to them or to share all the complexities involved.
         •    They may be made to feel responsible for the abuse.
         •    The person harming them may have established an emotional
              connection with them and/or the family to lower inhibitions
              (“grooming,” see definition in Attachment 1).
         •    The abuser may have convinced them that abuse is normal.
         •    They may be convinced no one will believe them.
         •    They may have dissociated from the events. A victim’s mind may
              have difficulty reconciling what happened. To survive, abuse
              victims can involuntarily disconnect from their thoughts, feelings,


   185
       Ibid.
   186
       Ibid., 73.
   187
       Ibid., 74.
                                       1109
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            memories, and surroundings. This makes it even more challenging
            for victims to accurately remember events, and timelines, or
            possess an absolute certainty about what occurred.
        •   They may love their abuser and desire to protect him or her.
        •   Many victims fear they will not be believed.
        •   A woman who has been sexually abused by a man may resist
            speaking with male leadership.
        •   They may be shocked, frightened, and/or angry.
        •   They may not know how to approach the problem.
        •   They may wonder, “Am I right?” “Did that really happen?”
        •   They may be physically, emotionally, and/or financially
            dependent on the abuser.
        •   They may question whether it is the right thing to do or if the abuse
            is really that bad.
        •   They may fear for what they will have to go through once the
            abuse is reported.
        •   They may be concerned about the cost, particularly if the abuser
            is another family member or a prominent member of the church
            or community.

Often victims of abuse encounter doubt regarding their credibility. One of the
reasons for this misunderstanding is the lack of a solid, biblical understanding
of the nature of evil and suffering. It is common for Christians to believe that
sexual abuse does not happen in the church. What we think we know about
other people, victims, and their families is inadequate when it comes to
identifying abuse.

Because of these multiple barriers, when someone discloses abuse, it might be
a gradual revelation. Abuse has many complex layers and the information
disclosed must be mediated without bias. It is essential for church leaders,
workers, staff, and volunteers to be familiar with the clues that signal abuse.

4. Responding to an Adult Sexual Abuse Disclosure or Discovery

The following are recommended for a careful response to the survivor and
accused:

        1. Church Advocacy Group
        2. Session Crisis Intervention Team


                                     1110
                                  APPENDIX V



Church Advocacy Group

Those who have experienced any form of sexual abuse, assault, or harassment
inside of or outside the church should have an easily accessible, empathetic,
reliable, and formal means of reporting. Persons with like experience or
situation help somewhat in decreasing fear of reporting. Appointed and highly
visible advocates in the local church might include a small group of well-
trained members such as:

        •    Mature youth,
        •    Women,
        •    Minorities,
        •    Aged,
        •    Persons who have survived various forms of abuse.

The advocacy group should document the concern or complaint in sufficient
detail to categorize it as reportable to public authorities (such as physical

abuse, rape, sexual assault, physical assault, battery, kidnapping, etc.) or non-
reportable (spiritual abuse short of the above, sexual harassment, adultery,
etc.).

Crisis Intervention Team

The Crisis Intervention Team consists of effective, wise, and disciplined elders
(other than those assigned to advocacy group) able to intervene promptly,
efficiently, and effectively to the complaint.

Major tasks will be to . . .

        1. Investigate the matter with the accused in a timely manner,
        2. Immediately relieve any allegedly abusive leaders from duty, and
        3. Provide shepherding counsel and support to the families.

The Crisis Intervention Team is also responsible as a liaison with the
Presbytery (if the accused is a TE) and communication to and with the
congregation and public regarding the matter. Truth, honesty, and
accountability should be the hallmarks of the team’s interactions with the
accused, congregation, Presbytery, and with the public.


                                      1111
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The Crisis Intervention Team (or appointed elder) should inform the accused
of the charge and relieve him from duty (if a church leader) immediately. They
should conduct their investigation in such a way as to carefully shepherd the
victim and preserve their safety, anonymity, privacy, and welfare.

Reportable complaints should be given to police with the victim’s permission.
The Advocacy Group and/or Crisis Intervention Team should inform the
pastor and/or Session (the latter only if the pastor is implicated) immediately
after report submission to authorities. This is to avoid cover up for serious
crimes and offenses at the beginning, the most crucial phase of the process.

Non-reportable complaints should be written in sufficient detail and presented
to the Session. It is wise to shield a victim’s identity unless given permission
to disclose. If the complaint is warranted, the Session might plan a strategy to
confront the accused. A complaint considered unwarranted should be
documented and provided to the accuser with the reasons for the
determination.

The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should meet with the accused after the complaint, or as soon as possible if
reported to authorities. Prior to this meeting, they should engage in prayer for
wisdom, discernment, and the preservation of the honor of Christ and His
church, as well as for grace in approach to both parties.

The accuser should not be present, nor named to the accused to protect against
reprisal and/or retribution. A written complaint should be presented to the
accused. The accused’s response will be documented verbatim by the
advocates, including the responses to appropriate further clarifying questions.
Such questions should provide details of

        •   Factual occurrence,
        •   Motives,
        •   Emotions,
        •   Prior events pertinent to the investigation as seen fit by the
            investigators and accused,
        •   Specific disagreement,
        •   Regret,
        •   Remorse, and/or
        •   Repentance expressed by the accused.


                                     1112
                                 APPENDIX V



Each answer should be recorded in as much detail as possible, using direct
quotes rather than paraphrases. These questions and statements should be
recorded and documented until the meeting has reached a conclusion.
Questions refused should also be so recorded.

The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should meet following a confrontation for prayer and to deliberate upon,
analyze, and formulate their findings and conclusion of the preliminary
investigation. They should document their findings and recommendations for
further pursuit of the complaint in writing and submit them to the accused. At
the presentation to the accused, the team should record any rebuttal,
clarification, or other response of the accused.

The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should prayerfully deliberate on the written complaint, response, and rebuttal,
and amend or sustain the original findings and recommendation in a final
report. This report should be given to both accuser and accused. The following
are possible courses of action that may be recommended to the Session:

        1. The issue be resolved with follow-up by the Advocacy Group
           and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder to both
           parties separately.
        2. The issue requires further investigation by Session and/or
           outside investigators or counsel before actions can be
           recommended.
        3. The abuse report requires immediate action such as contacting
           the police or Presbytery if not already reported, suspension from
           duty, or medical/psychiatric intervention.
        4. Action requires a formal program of biblical counseling,
           spiritual discipline, mentoring, and accountability of progress in
           conformity to Christ by one or both parties.
        5. Formal charges or dissolution of pastoral relationship is
           warranted if abuser is a teaching elder.

Bringing Charges against a Teaching Elder

Besides prayer, confrontation, deliberation, and investigation, it is important
that PCA churches avail themselves of the formal system for accountability if
a teaching elder is guilty of sexual abuse.



                                     1113
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The PCA Book of Church Order (BCO) Chapter 34 is titled “Special Rules
Pertaining to Process Against a Minister.” A church minister (teaching elder)
is a “member” of a Presbytery, not the local church. Therefore, it is necessary
to pursue accountability through members of the Presbytery (34:4).

There are three possible ways to proceed by the Session or church members:

        1. Discuss the matter with another elder in the Presbytery, of which
        the teaching elder is a member, seeking their personal aid in further
        confrontation.
        2. Bring clear, documented proof of sexual abuse to the committee that
        handles charges brought against member pastors for their consultation.
        3. Bring charges against the minister before this committee. Two
        witnesses must bring testimony (BCO 34-5) or there must be clear
        “corroborative evidence.”

Although the first and second options may be less intimidating to church
members, bringing an abusive leader to trial is necessary to provide safety to
the broader church. A teaching elder who is guilty of sexual abuse should be
publicly disallowed from ministry in the PCA.
Should the congregation wish to remove a teaching elder due to his sexual sin,
they are required to follow these steps:

        1. “. . . there shall always be a meeting of the congregation called
           and conducted in the same manner as the call of the pastor (BCO
           23-1).”
        2. The meeting must be presided over by a ruling or teaching elder
           of the PCA.
        3. The will of the congregation (as voted upon) is presented to the
           Presbytery for approval for the “dissolution of the pastoral
           relation.”

Independent Assessments or Investigations

In the Westminster Confession of Faith, in a discussion of the sufficiency of
Scripture, the divines say,

        There are some circumstances concerning the worship of God, and
        government of the church, common to human actions and societies,
        which are to be ordered by the light of nature, and Christian prudence,


                                     1114
                                  APPENDIX V



         according to the general rules of the Word, which are always to be
         observed. [WCF 1:6]

In circumstances where Scripture does not provide clarity, a society, by
common grace, may have come to understand truth that may be observed by
the church. The divines carefully note that Scripture is the final authority, but
truth may be found in the “common . . . actions and societies” due to God’s
common grace and general revelation.

Regarding abuse in the church, there are times when outside counsel from
experts in fields of study to which a particular church has limited access,
should be sought for the good and care of church members. Agencies and
organizations that are equipped to evaluate and make recommendations
impartially (unhindered by church politics) can be effectively utilized by
church courts.

Scripture is clear that judgments by church courts must be impartial (Lev.
19:15). The relational dynamics found within the church must not influence
judgments. Seeking outside counsel may provide this objective assessment.

In addition, there may be an abusive culture in which the church is immersed.
There are often blind spots making it difficult to see the abuse. Rather than
considering outside counsel as a threat or liability, Scripture makes evident
that a humble commitment to seeking truth, holiness, justice, and compassion
is at the heart of wise leadership (Prov. 1:2-5, 23:23, Heb. 10:34).
Finally, church courts are not bound by outside counsel. In the end, the
recommendations of non-church agencies or organizations must be weighed
in light of Scripture with wisdom to determine final judgments in each case.

There are three main situations when outside counsel might be invaluable.

1. When a decision needs to be made

         Rationale: When a specific step188 is necessary to move the case
         forward, and certainty is required, an outside expert evaluation of the
         evidence may provide clarity. Outside investigation also helps confirm
         initial perceptions in a situation which created any doubt regarding the
         alleged abuse.

   188
      For example, supporting a victim who divorces an abusive spouse, bringing
charges against an abuser, firing a staff member, or assisting in removing the
ordination of an allegedly abusive pastor.
                                      1115
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



2. When the alleged abuser was a volunteer, staff member or pastor, on
   church grounds, or in the context of a church event

       Rationale: In any of these situations, outside help is critical for
       providing confidence to move forward with specific action related to
       an abuser. External, objective analysis is necessary in order to provide
       a genuine pursuit for truth. This will also provide a safe place for
       reports from other victims to come forward. Victims must have
       confidence in the investigation so that they will trust they will be heard
       and kept safe from further abuse.

3. When there are allegations or reason to believe that warning signs were
   missed by leaders in the church, or disclosures mishandled

       Rationale: Establishing outside counsel is an important step for
       evaluating whether any warning signs were missed that could have
       prevented the abuse, or in identifying and correcting any weaknesses
       in church policies, practices, or culture. It is not uncommon for God’s
       people to be “hardened by the deceitfulness of sin” and outside
       counsel can provide the exhortation necessary to see the
       organization’s blind spots and make necessary corrections in the
       culture.

       Abuse allegations may arise in a context when the abuser is no longer
       in the church or perhaps no longer living and new information
       indicates that former or current staff members were notified of the
       abuse or had reason to know the abuse was occurring. Even if the
       abuse or possible mishandling or failure to report occurred years or
       decades prior, outside counsel is vital for several reasons.

       1. Survivors, deeply wounded by the abuse, deserve to know the
          truth.
       2. When multiple errors occur, repentance is a biblical requirement.
       3. A church or ministry that displays God’s heart will desire truth
          and be zealous in righteousness. This includes ensuring any
          necessary changes to policies, practices, or culture. Often, when
          abuse is mishandled, there are entrenched beliefs and patterns that
          contributed. Unless this faulty worldview is clearly identified and
          corrected, even if it developed unintentionally, abuse will
          continue.


                                     1116
                                  APPENDIX V



        4. Even if the sin occurred earlier, there is biblical precedent for
           confessing those sins publicly (2 Chron. 29:3-11).

What To Look for in Seeking Outside Counsel

Individuals and/or firms should meet the following basic criteria.

        1. Substantial training, skill, and experience with abuse, trauma, and
           related dynamics, as well as experience with investigative
           techniques, evidence handling, and investigative practices
        2. A consistent and trusted reputation in the survivor and advocate
           community: Enlisting those with a positive standing will help a
           ministry build trust with abuse survivors.
        3. Clearly identify and act as assessors, educators, or investigators,
           not legal representation, even if they are licensed legal
           professionals: Retaining someone as an attorney immediately
           creates an adversarial relationship between the ministry and the
           survivor, even if unintentional. This is because when an
           attorney/client relationship is formed it creates obligations and
           privileges between the hiring entity and the attorney.
        4. Attorneys owe a fiduciary obligation to the ministry as a
           corporation or business, not to the church as God’s people, and
           certainly not to the survivors and their families. The
           attorney/client relationship also creates confidentiality and legal
           privileges designed to protect and hide information. The creation
           of these privileges is commonly used to obscure information and
           protect assets against liability. It demonstrates a focused financial
           priority rather than that of transparency or seeking justice and
           truth.

5. Reporting

Churches are not qualified to conduct investigations of sexual abuse. Local
authorities are specifically trained; therefore, if a victim desires the abuse be
reported, it must be reported immediately. Delay can result in loss of evidence,
victim tampering, tainting witness memory, or providing the perpetrator an
opportunity to threaten or pressure their victims to remain silent or recant their
testimony. Conducting an “in house” investigation prior to reporting not only
jeopardizes the victim and the chain of evidence, it may also fail at detecting
the actual abuser. Abusers often continue offending; therefore, a church that


                                      1117
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



conducts an incompetent investigation may be held responsible. The church
has a moral and legal obligation to report suspected abuse.

When

Most states do not mandate reporting of adult sexual abuse. The decision to
report should be made by the victim. Though reporting to law enforcement can
provide the opportunity to provide protection for the victim, gather evidence,
investigate, prosecute, and bring accountability to the perpetrator, the victim
must also be prepared for the dangers involved (retaliation) and sometimes
difficult investigation and prosecution.

Pressuring the victim to report may discourage them from reporting in the
future. The victim should be encouraged to have the medical forensic exam
conducted no matter her intention to report to law enforcement or not. The
church should walk beside the victim along each step of the process to provide
encouragement in Christ and safety.

Reason to Believe

Believing the alleged victim is a care-filled response. There will be time later
to verify the details of the report. Professionals and the proper authorities are
the entities who will determine the veracity of the claims. When a report is
made, a victim needs a safe and empathetic ear. Deuteronomy 22:25-27 makes
it clear that a victim of sexual assault, though no witnesses were present,
should be trusted and action taken to bring accountability to the offending
individual. False reports are rare.189 Identifying a false report is best
determined by a qualified investigator.

How

Reports of adult sexual assault and rape should be made to legal authorities
only with victim permission. The victim’s safety is foremost and a report to
authorities may create further damage.

To Whom


   189
        See also, Attachment 7: Myths About Abuse for further citations. David Lisak
et al., “False Allegations of Sexual Assault: An Analysis of Ten Years of Reported
Cases,” Violence Against Women 16, no. 12 (December 2010), 1318-34,
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/1077801210387747.
                                        1118
                                   APPENDIX V



        •    Law Enforcement

Sexual assault and rape are crimes and are prosecutable in all fifty states. If the
victim is willing, churches can report the abuse to the law enforcement
officials who will investigate the assault.

        •    Local Advocacy Center

It can be very helpful to victims to make contact with a local advocacy center.
These centers, some faith-based, often provide counseling, support groups,
basic essential needs like food, clothing, shelter, and protective care.

        •    Additional Agencies

Child-protective services may help aid in providing safety to children who are
impacted by witnessing adult sexual abuse.

        •    Pastors, Sessions, or Presbyteries

Leaders in the church should be apprised of the assault or rape if the victim
allows and the abuser is a church member. When an allegation of abuse is
made against someone in the church, recognize the likelihood there may be
other victims. Additional people in the congregation may have other details
important to the investigation. Leaders have a responsibility to protect the
sheep under their care.

        •    Congregations

When an allegation of abuse is made against someone in the church, recognize
the likelihood there may be other victims. Additional people in the
congregation may have other details important to the investigation.
Notification is not a determination of guilt; it is the necessary means for
ensuring a proper investigation. Investigations are incomplete without this
wide-ranging information. The intent is not to slander a person, rather it is to
announce true statements about a report regarding an individual.

What

What if the victim or their family does not want to report? There are times
when the abuse is compounded by the unsupportive response of others,
whether church members, leaders, or those outside the church. Many victims
                                       1119
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



have endured unwarranted and aggressive questioning, creating an unsafe
atmosphere for reporting. Depending on the length and severity of the abuse,
it is common for a victim to lose their confidence in making decisions. They
may be paralyzed with fear.

Statistically, 50 out of 310 sexual assaults reported to law enforcement result
in criminal charges. Approximately 25 will result in conviction and jail time.190
One study concluded that only “1.6% of all complaints ended in a trial.”191 Of
the many studies, it is clear that statistically a sexual assault case is not likely
to make it to trial.

6. Redemptive Shepherding

Working with abused victims presents an incredible opportunity to bring
redemption and light to circumstances, and to display the gospel to those who
hurt. God shows concern for the broken-hearted (Ps. 34:18). He is not silent in
the face of evil (Ps. 34:15-16). His people must also lovingly and carefully
shepherd those impacted from the evil of abuse. Protecting the weak and
vulnerable is the responsibility of all God’s people (Ezek. 34:4, Acts 20:35).

All caregiving has potential for error. The possibility of causing additional
harm exists. When considering a case, it is common for those involved to
benefit the accused rather than the victim with “charitable judgment.” People
are generally hesitant to violate the “innocent until proven guilty” standard.192
This is the standard that guides process in the legal system. The burden of
proof is then placed on the victim. When caring for the abused, weigh the
difficulty of this process carefully. Rarely does abuse happen in public with
witnesses, and a “not guilty” verdict is not necessarily a declaration of
innocence. It simply means the accuser failed to provide sufficient evidence of
the assault.

    190
         “The Criminal Justice System: Statistics,” RAINN, https://www.rainn.org
/statistics/criminal-justice-system.
    191
         Melissa S. Morabito, Linda M. Williams, and April Pattavina, “Decision
Making in Sexual Assault Cases: Replication Research on Sexual Violence Case
Attrition in the U.S.,” National Institute of Justice, February 2019, 108,
https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/252689.pdf.
    192
        Brad Hambrick, “Why Is It So Hard to Have Constructive Conversations about
Abuse?,” Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist
Convention, February 14, 2022, https://erlc.com/resource-library/articles/why-is-it-
so-hard-to-have-constructive-conversations-about-abuse/.
                                       1120
                                  APPENDIX V




Shepherding victims well requires God’s people to love one another and
“believe all things” (1 Cor. 13:7). Err on the side of safety when it comes to
protecting the vulnerable. Take necessary steps to restrict the alleged abuser’s
access, report the allegations (if approved by the victim), and notify the church.
Allow the magistrate to investigate and make any legal judgments.

Failure to take these steps of protection leaves people at risk and can
potentially suppress evidence. For victims, the failure of those in authority to
respond swiftly and concisely implies they are lying. Survivors who sense this
resistance will quickly shut down and/or retract allegations out of fear.

Shepherding Adults Who Have Been Sexually Abused

If an adult who had been sexually abused as a child comes forward, see “Child
Abuse: Shepherding the Victim and Family” for shepherding and “Child
Abuse: Responding to a Child Abuse Disclosure or Discovery” for reporting.
Pastoral Care for the Victim and Family

The church should be a sanctuary for victims, a training ground to prevent
assault, and a facilitator of emotional, spiritual, and physical healing. All
victims and potential victims of sexual assault need the following from the
church:

        •   An empathetic, well-trained and effective person/persons who
            will confidentially guide the process of recovery and facilitate
            obtaining appropriate resources both in and outside the church.
            This includes, but is not limited to, emergency medical care (rape
            crisis intervention), counseling, primary medical care, psychiatric
            care, and spiritual counseling.
        •   A small group of survivors who are in the process of recovery and
            growth to come alongside the victim and demonstrate they are not
            alone nor at fault.
        •   Preaching from the word on the impact of assault, pornography,
            and other idolatry upon the Imago Dei of women, men, and
            children created by God, as well as His grace, mercy, and ever-
            present love for victims.




                                      1121
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Practical Care for the Victim and Family

There are many practical needs which should be met; however, people
involved in the situation are hurting deeply. Grieve with them, ask intelligent
questions about how they are, pray with them, and provide a connection. Enlist
other members in the church to do the same. While care should be taken not to
overpromise, or offer false hope, remind the family that God sees and knows
all things and has not left them. Listen to their lead as you follow up, but don’t
simply wait for them to reach out or identify what they need.

When people are abused, the ability to see and clearly comprehend the
situation is dramatically hindered. It often requires substantial time and
distance from an abusive situation to fully recognize and articulate what
happened. If they experienced grooming and/or have been controlled or
criticized for any length of time, it may make simple communication of details
very difficult for the survivor.

In addition, an abuse victim will struggle to convey their own desires. Church
members and leaders help victims by encouraging them to communicate their
thoughts and make their own decisions. This may take time. Patient listening,
wisdom, understanding, empathy, and compassion are required (1 Thess.
5:14), together with a commitment to walk alongside for however long as is
necessary.

Prior to a crisis, leaders and staff should familiarize themselves with typical
problems victims and their families encounter and how the church can help
with support and/or practical involvement. It is challenging for families to
discern what they need amid so much grief or even how to communicate these
needs. They likely will not know what options are available. Church leaders
who proactively pursue care and help provide practical guidance through the
church or community resources can be an incredible gift.

Survivors of sexual abuse need the following from the church.193

           ● A significant sense of belonging. Sexually abused men and
               women feel isolated and unwanted. Often, they have no sense of
               what it means to belong to a family group. Not only can the church
               provide a place where the survivor experiences the love and

   193
         This section is an excerpt from Langberg, Counseling Survivors, 272-276.


                                         1122
                         APPENDIX V



    affirmation of a family, it often is the only family some survivors
    have. Many survivors have either homes they cannot return to for
    safety reasons, or families who do not acknowledge the truth of
    their lives.
●   To be pursued. God came to us. When others suffer, we often
    expect them to come to us and ask for what they need. Connection
    requires us to take the initiative to pursue suffering people.
    Lovingly pursue by calling, sending encouraging notes, and
    offering help with immediate needs.
●   To have physical and/or financial needs met. Is the survivor
    safe from their abuser? Are they safe from their own destructive
    impulses? Are they suicidal? Do they abuse any substances? Do
    they need financial help? Are they physically able to care for
    themselves? Are they able to care for their family? Do they need
    someone to call in the middle of the night? Do they live alone?
    Are they safe doing so? Where do they spend the holidays?
●   Hope without condemnation. In the darkest of times, we struggle
    to have hope and faith, . . . suffering people often need others to
    have faith and hope for them. Admonitions to hope or trust only
    result in despair; if the sufferers were able, they would do so. How
    much better to come alongside and tell survivors that where they
    are lacking and/or unable, we will stand in the gap and believe
    God for them.
●   A balance of ministry and fun. Often when we do reach out to
    sufferers, we reduce our relationship to one of pure ministry . . .
    When we bring fun to sufferers’ lives, we provide an oasis that
    will help them feel loved simply for who they are. It is also
    important for survivors to feel needed by those who care for them.
    Although an “I can’t do . . .” needs to be honored, very few people
    want simply to be takers. Give them dignity by allowing them to
    contribute to your life, even if it means just letting them do the
    dishes after a meal.
●   Others’ willingness to witness great pain and believe the
    “unbelievable.” Many men and women have lived in terrible
    isolation, thinking their secrets were too horrible to be told.
    Calling back memories about such things can cause great denial
    in the listener. Yet we who believe sin is so hideous as to require
    the death of God Himself should of all people find evil believable.
●   A listener, not a fixer or a blamer. To attend to the struggle of
    another by listening is to bestow honor on that person. You cannot
    “fix” a history of . . . abuse. You can stand with someone while
                             1123
            MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    they courageously face the truth of their life and love them while
    they struggle to learn to live with it. Learn how to sit and be quiet.
    When we don’t know what to say, it is usually best to say nothing
    rather than allow our discomfort with silence and pain to drive us
    to rattle off an answer. One of the ways we cope with horror is by
    attempting to explain it or find out what made it happen. Searching
    for such explanations can easily lead to blaming the survivor.
    Never imply that the survivor is to blame for the abuse. Nothing
    [anyone] has ever done, no matter how provocative, is justification
    for abuse (Matt. 7:20-23). The abuser always carries responsibility
    for the abuse.
●   Resources. If the survivor needs and wants professional help,
    assist in finding competent counseling. They may need you to help
    them know what questions to ask of the counselor. Is the counselor
    a licensed professional? Does the counselor accept third party
    payments? Does the counselor have training and experience in the
    treatment of sexual abuse? What kind of experience and from
    where? The survivor may need you to go with them to the first
    few appointments and simply wait in the waiting room.
●   Knowledgeable friends. If you are going to walk alongside
    someone who is dealing with the issue of sexual abuse, then you
    need to be knowledgeable about the subject. It would be wise to
    read several books on the topic. [See the resources section in this
    report for help]. If you do not understand the problem, you will
    more than likely make hurtful mistakes.
●   To resolve spiritual issues. Understand that the spiritual
    ramifications of [sexual abuse] are complex and powerful. When
    a "Christian" father, uncle, grandfather, camp counselor, or pastor
    sexually abuses a child, beliefs and feelings about who God is, His
    love, and His protection are all shattered and are not easily
    reassembled. A few verses will not put it all back together.
●   Time. Healing from the devastating consequences of childhood
    sexual abuse takes a long time, usually years. Should you choose
    to walk alongside someone who is struggling in this area, it is
    important to recognize that you are facing a long process.
    Survivors will wrestle with powerful urges to resist facing the
    truth; they will fight hard and long to rid themselves of lies. They
    may endure months or years of terrifying nightmares that rob them
    of much needed sleep. A small network of trustworthy people will
    often work better than one person alone. If the survivor is married,
    their spouse will also need a support network who will walk with
                              1124
                                APPENDIX V



         them on the long road. . . . Although our God is a God of
         redemption, He usually works that redemption out through people
         and over time.
       ● Intercession. Jesus Himself is at the right hand of the Father
         interceding for us. The Spirit prays for us when words will not
         come. . . . Pain silences and isolates. We who come alongside need
         to pray for and with those who are silenced and isolated.

As you come alongside survivors of sexual abuse, be aware that several
dynamics may prevent you from giving effective help.

       ● Slow down. Suffering slows people down, and if we are going to
           walk with others in their suffering, then we must slow down too.
       ●   Shoulder their burdens. We become a hindrance rather than a
           help when we greet those who suffer with statements such as: "If
           you would only . . . attend church, read Scripture more, believe
           more, stop thinking about yourself, put the past behind you."
           Rather than say, “Here, let me help you carry that heavy load,” we
           end up putting heavy burdens on already bowed backs. Remember
           that God our Savior did not greet us with, “If you would only . . .”
           Instead, He says, “Here, let Me show you how. Let Me shoulder
           the burden. Let Me be with you.”
       ●   Keep confidences. How often confidences are betrayed under the
           guise of sharing a prayer request! If we are to help those who
           struggle with things that frighten them, humiliate them, and shame
           them, then we must be trustworthy people. We must learn that
           there are things we can share with no one but the Father. To work
           with survivors is to minister to those who know betrayal well. We
           want them to learn to trust. . . . Unless a life is threatened,
           confidences should never be broken.
       ●   Think long-term. Like managed care, the church seems to think
           that short-term [care] is right and should always work. The more
           spiritual among us get better quickly. We tend to believe that those
           who struggle long term clearly do not love God enough. And yet
           we say we believe this to be a dark world where sin is rampant and
           destructive. We believe that God is long-suffering and merciful.
           Where do we get our quick-fix model? How fortunate we are that
           God does not adhere to short-term sanctification!
       ●   Male leadership. A woman who spent her childhood being
           sexually abused by a man will have all kinds of reactions to male
           leadership. One of those responses may be fear. It is possible that
                                    1125
           MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    this will prevent her from seeking the help she so desperately
    needs. Many churches are now training women to work alongside
    women in crisis so that when a woman is dealing with an issue
    like abuse, she has some recourse other than male leadership. We
    need to respond with tenderness and sensitivity to the fear and
    damage resulting from abuse.
●   Accommodate the suffering. In many ways, the church seems to
    be structured to accommodate the whole and the healthy. Often
    activities are designed for intact couples and families. . . On one
    hand there is nothing wrong with that. However, that perspective
    does not account for sickness, suffering, trauma, dying, terror, and
    torment. To experience these things is to fail to fit into the
    structure. When that results in responses of judgment, humiliation,
    impatience, and denial, we have failed to be the church God has
    called us to be. According to the apostle Paul, the church should
    bestow more abundant honor on those members who lack it rather
    than applaud those who have no need of it (1 Cor. 12:23-24).
●   Human hearts are deceitful. [Sexual abuse] is kept secret
    because many fear they will not be believed. Attention to the
    problem is not a priority, because the problem is believed to be
    rare. . . . Again, knowing we live in a world ruled by the prince of
    the power of the air and knowing that human hearts are deceitful
    above all things, why are we surprised?
●   Venting. One survivor said that fear of expressions of pain is a
    hindrance when others cannot distinguish between a “roar of pain”
    (venting rebellious-sounding verbiage about God)—like a lioness
    with a thorn in her paw versus genuine rebellion. The Psalms
    contain much venting (Ps. 22:1, Ps. 35:22-25). Even Jesus said,
    “My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?” (Matt. 27:46).
●   The agony of redemption. We often do not understand the nature
    of evil and suffering, the complexities of human development . . .
    the fact that [sexual abuse] is a criminal act, and that redemption
    in a life never comes easily. Yes, the God we worship is capable
    of redeeming the pain beyond words into something that gives life
    and brings glory to Him. However, the transfiguring of agony into
    redemption cost Jesus inestimably. Death . . . does not normally
    transform into life in this dark world. The beauty of redemption in
    a life never comes easily.
●   Be aware. Be very aware of your vocabulary, your timing, and
    your body language. A survivor has been repeatedly abused by
    another's body and words. They will be afraid of yours. At the
                             1126
                                  APPENDIX V



            same time, they may be starved for touch and affection. Do not
            touch without her permission. Never touch in a sexual way. Learn
            to read and acknowledge body cues. Often it is through body
            language, rather than words, that people communicate emotions
            such as fear or anger.

Shepherding the Guilty Party

Repentant

The responsibility of the church in the case of sexual abuse is to report to legal
authorities whether there are signs of repentance or not. This is done only at
the discretion of the victim.
The gospel of grace must be given to perpetrators of sexual violence as it is for
all who have sinned and fall short of the glory of God. However, due to the
egregious violence of sexual assault, a repentant perpetrator must be
shepherded carefully within the church community.

The guilty party must be discipled by a church leader or counselor who has
been trained in sexual assault. The depth of the sinful psychology of sexual
abuse must be carefully and boldly investigated and challenged by the
counselor.

It is unwise to allow the guilty party any unsupervised access to those who are
vulnerable to the perpetrator’s behavior. Though an abusive individual may
give a seemingly clear testimony to his repentance, it must be followed with
extensive evidence that his words are expressive of a significantly sanctified
heart. This may only be confirmed by a counselor trained in this particular sin.

Non-Repentant

If the guilty party does not show clear signs of repentance in words and actions,
process should be taken by the Session to remove the offender from
fellowship. [See the PCA Book of Church Order, Part II, beginning with
Chapter 27.]

Church Members

As shepherds of the local body of Christ, church leaders have a responsibility
to nurture and protect God’s people under their care. It is likely that bystanders


                                      1127
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



in the congregation have also been affected by the sexual abuse of the guilty
party. They will likewise need help in processing the painful experience.

Members of the congregation may feel guilt and shame for having missed
warning signs of the abuse. They may carry anger and fear. These hurting
members will need special care by church leaders and members. Their deep
emotional hurt may create discomfort for leaders, but shepherding them well
will mean laying aside the need for comfort to step into their struggles and
encourage them with the gospel.

There may be additional victims of sex crimes in the congregation who will
need a safe place to share their experience. Shepherds will need to continually,
in word and action, make the church a safe place for sharing:

           •   In word, by expressing trust in those who willingly expose the
               violence,
           •   In action, by believing a report and acting quickly to make sure
               the victim is safe and cared for.

7. Prevention of Sexual Abuse

Shepherds are responsible to protect congregants to the best of their ability. A
leader’s failure of “protecting and providing for [members] all things necessary
for soul and body” by the diligent watchfulness for wolves in the church is a
heinous offense.194 Reasonable measures should be in place for the prevention
of abusive behaviors that cause catastrophic harm to those attending places of
worship.

How the Church Can Help Prevent Abuse

           ● Train staff, leaders, and volunteers to recognize and report
             abuse.
             If the means for training are unavailable in the church, consider
             bringing in an outside organization or program.
           ● Insist on background checks for staff.
           ● Be known for reporting suspected abuse or neglect.
           ● Communicate to the congregation which pastoral staff are
             trained and willing to intervene when abuse is suspected or
             reported.

   194
         Westminster Larger Catechism (Lawrenceville, GA: CDM, 2007), Question 129.
                                        1128
                                      APPENDIX V



           ● Clearly articulate abuse as a sin. Teach that God hates abuse and
                 calls His people to protect the vulnerable.
           ●     Clarify that abuse is not a private issue. The church should
                 welcome the exposure of evil and be willing to work with the local
                 government (Rom. 13).
           ●     Teach your church's theology of abuse.
           ●     Require your leaders to model exemplary sexual lives. Because
                 of their high calling, high visibility, and high influence, pastors
                 and other church leaders should be expected to live godly lives
                 (Titus 1:5-9).195
           ●     Address tangential issues such as pornography and other media
                 which eroticize violence.
           ●     Extend education to children and teenagers. Teach how to
                 recognize and report abuse. Children should understand, while the
                 Bible instructs them to obey their parents, the biblical command
                 for obedience to authority is conditional (Eph. 6:1). It is good,
                 godly, and right to expose sin.

8. Case Study

Debby

Debby stared at the light fixture on the hallway ceiling. She remembered doing
that same thing forty years prior, stare at a light fixture. “This shouldn’t be so
disorienting,” Debby thought to herself. Now, at 58 years old, all the shame,
disgust, and fear she had felt that night so long ago came rushing back. The
letter she held in her hand prompted those awful feelings. And, although her
heart raced, and she felt like it would beat right out of her chest, it was nothing
compared to that other time she had stared at a light fixture so intently.

Debby was a senior in high school when her youth director and his wife
presented her with the gospel. She was so excited! A Savior? Loved her? The
idea of a love like that took her breath away. And the fact that some of the
most loving people she’d ever known shared it with her made it even more
significant. Debby felt their care and concern. As soon as she heard the gospel
and understood, she prayed the sinner’s prayer. Debby was instantly on fire
for the Lord. If the church doors were open, she was inside.

   195
         Ibid.


                                          1129
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Debby loved everything about youth group. She loved the fellowship with
friends, adored the praise and worship time, and treasured her youth director’s
teachings. Everything he said made sense. He seemed to know the Lord, and
his lessons reflected that understanding. She was growing spiritually in leaps
and bounds.

While church was going well, school was not. One Wednesday evening the
teenagers were all gathered in small groups for prayer, and Debby asked for
prayer for her math homework. Everyone laughed aloud, so her youth director
came over to find out what was going on. Debby told him about her request,
and without hesitation the director offered his help. He bragged that math was
his specialty and told Debby to bring her book the next week so they could
stay after youth group for lessons.

Debby had no idea what “lessons” her youth director had in mind. She
followed him up to the sound booth the following Wednesday after group, but
before she knew it, he pinned her on a couch, and she couldn’t move. The light
fixture in the hallway completely captured Debby’s attention. Through tears,
she determined not to let it out of her sight. Such an inanimate object of course
couldn’t bring peace (or safety for that matter), but at least it gave Debby
something—anything—to focus on rather than the heavy man gyrating on top
of her. Her goal was to make it out to that hallway.

When it was over, Debby ran. She was too ashamed to tell anyone what had
happened and felt no one would believe her anyway. Everyone loved the youth
director. She did everything possible to avoid being in his presence. She quit
going to youth group and eventually moved to a relative’s home far away. She
finished high school remotely and enrolled at a college in another state. A
multitude of thoughts constantly tormented Debby. “Was it something I did?
Could I have run? Screamed? Would anyone have heard me?”

Debby found another church, stuffed her memories and questions, and focused
on getting a degree.

Several years later, Debby received an invitation to a wedding for the daughter
of a childhood friend from youth group. She knew it would be difficult entering
the old church building again, but she heard the youth director had moved long
ago. So, she pulled it together for her friend and responded “yes,” she would
attend.



                                      1130
                                   APPENDIX V



Debby entered the building and found her way to a pew near the front of the
sanctuary. While she was waiting for the ceremony to begin, she glanced at
the pew rack and saw the Sunday bulletin from the week before. Out of
curiosity, she picked it up and began to read. To her horror, there was an
announcement for the installation services of her old youth director. Upon the
upcoming retirement of the church’s pastor, her youth director would be
ordained as the new Senior Pastor. Debby’s insides shook throughout the entire
wedding.

The Monday after she returned home, Debby called the retiring pastor. The
last thing she wanted to do was reveal that the youth director had sexually
abused her when she was a high school student. But she wouldn’t have been
able to live with herself had she said nothing. The years of grieving and
counseling helped embolden her. Unfortunately, the call set her back almost
to where she began.

“Mmmm . . . I see . . . thank you for telling me.” And that was it. So went the
phone call with her beloved childhood pastor. Debby was floored. She could
tell he didn’t believe her. He mumbled something about it being a “done deal”
and “there was nothing he could do.” Debby thought she had nowhere else to
turn. Once again, she put the awful memories behind her. She went back into
counseling and moved on with her life.

Debby looked at the letter again. Her mind went back to that phone call all
those years prior. She finally forced herself to stop staring at the hallway light
fixture with the burned-out light bulb. The letter she’d been holding fell to the
floor. She picked it up and her eyes once again skimmed the contents. “Dear
Mrs. . . . First Street Pres has begun an investigation into misconduct . . . Senior
Pastor . . . multiple victims . . . if you’re willing to participate . . .” Debby
shook her head back and forth, as if she could make the memories dissipate
like the snow in a snow globe.

She was unsuccessful.

Brainstorming questions for help developing best practices:

        1. What structures and/or procedures should your church or ministry
           already have in place in case a situation like this occurs?
        2. What questions would have been helpful for theretiring pastor to
           ask?


                                       1131
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        3. What should the retiring pastor have done upon receiving the call
            from Debby?
        4. How does the “reason to believe” standard help with this
            situation?
        5. Upon discovering the circumstances, what will you do first?
        6. What will you do next?
        7. Who can you call for help navigating all the details?
        8. Who in your church is versed in sexual abuse and compassionate
            to care for a victim and/or family?
        9. What action steps will you take against the alleged perpetrator?
        10. What will you tell the congregation and how?
        11. How will you determine if an outside agency will be helpful for
            this case?


SECTION FIVE: CHILD ABUSE

1. Summary Description – Child Abuse

Child abuse occurs when an authority figure, whether through action or failing
to act, causes injury, death, emotional harm, sexual abuse, exploitation, or risk
of serious harm to a child. There are many forms of child maltreatment,
neglect, physical abuse, sexual abuse, spiritual, and emotional abuse. In this
section we will help you recognize, respond to, report, and redemptively
shepherd when there is a case of suspected child abuse.

2. Expressing God’s Heart

In Scripture, the care of children is very important. God equates “receiving”
children with “receiving” Him (Matt. 18:5-6). God's Word showcases He has
a particular concern for the weak and vulnerable (Mic. 6:8; Isa. 61:1), and
children are among the most vulnerable entrusted to our care. Further, Jesus
loves the teachable souls of children, and He is not pleased with those who
harm them (Prov. 22:6; Matt. 18:6; Luke 18:15-17; Mark 10:13-16, Eph. 6:4;
Col. 3:21). In James 1:27, it tells us that caring for children in need pleases
God. Safeguarding the physical, emotional, and spiritual well-being of young
people and other vulnerable individuals is among the most important
responsibilities of the local church (WCF Q. 138, Q. 139).




                                      1132
                                   APPENDIX V



3. Recognition of Child Abuse and Neglect

Recognition of the abuse or neglect of a child is one important way to protect
vulnerable children under the church’s care. According to a study reported by
Christianity Today, on average there are seventy allegations of child abuse in
the United States in churches each week.196 One in seven children experienced
child abuse or neglect in the past year.197

People tend to view the church as a safe place, especially for children and
youth. It is difficult for church members to believe there are those working,
volunteering, and attending our churches who abuse children. It is important
to acknowledge this potentiality and to properly guard children from abuse in
the local church.

Relational Spheres

There is often a false understanding that people who commit child abuse can
be easily detected. Often there is also a mistaken belief that abuse is
perpetrated by someone the child or community does not know. Statistics point
to a different reality and even highlight that many children are abused by other
children. Understanding who perpetrates abuse can help the church provide
good education and implement wise protection policies.

Authority

Child abuse can be perpetrated by a person in a position of authority, such as
the child's teacher, guardian, relative, sports coach, youth pastor, or other
prominent figure. Because of the person's position over the child, they will
experience intimidation. This is very confusing for the child. Children will fail
to report, or delay in reporting, abuse by an authority figure.

    ●    Acquaintance

Approximately 90% of children who are victims of sexual abuse know their
abuser. Only 10% of sexually abused children are abused by a stranger. About

   196
       Ted Olsen. “70 Child Abuse Accusations Against Churches Each Week—and
Most Are Protestants.” ChristianityToday.com, April 1, 2002,
https://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2002/aprilweb-only/4-1-51.0.html.
    197
        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Preventing Child Abuse (Atlanta:
U.S. Department Health and Human Services, 2020),
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/childabuseandneglect/fastfact.html.
                                        1133
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



60% of children who are sexually abused are abused by people the family
trusts.198

    ●    Child on child

Not all perpetrators are adults—an estimated 30-50% of reported cases of child
sexual abuse are perpetrated by individuals under the age of 18.199 As many as
40% of children sexually abused are abused by older or more powerful
children.200 The younger the child victim, the more likely it is that the
perpetrator is a juvenile. Juveniles are the offenders in 43% of assaults on
children under age six. Of these offenders, 14% are under age 12. Juveniles
who commit sex offenses against other children are more likely than adult sex
offenders to offend in groups, offend at schools, and have more male and
younger victims.201 A small number of juvenile offenders—one out of eight—
are younger than age 12. Females constitute 7% of juveniles who commit sex
offenses.202 Most adolescent sex offenders are not sexual predators and will
not become adult offenders. They are more responsive to treatment than
offending adults.203

This type of abuse will likely intensify the shepherding required by the church,
especially if children are members of separate families. While the victim and
their family will need to have care focused on protection and safety, the
offending child’s family will also require care as well as shepherding through
the process. Because the needs of child-on-child abuse within your church are

   198
       D. Finkelhor, “Characteristics of Crimes against Juveniles” (Durham, NH:
Crimes against Children Research Center, 2012), 13. and J. Whealin, “Child Sexual
Abuse” (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, National Center for
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, (2007-05-22).
   199
       United States Department of Justice National Sex Offender Public Website,
“Questions and Answers About Sexual Assault and Sexual Offending.” Accessed
April 2022, https://www.nsopw.gov/en/SafetyAndEducation/QuestionsAndAnswers.
   200
       D. Finkelhor, “Characteristics of Crimes against Juveniles” (Durham, NH:
Crimes against Children Research Center, 2012).
   201
       L.A. Greenfeld,. “Sex Offenses and Offenders: An Analysis of Data on Rape
and Sexual Assault: (Washington DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ-163392, 1997).
   202
       D. Finkelhor, R. Ormrod, M. Chaffin, “Juveniles Who Commit Sex Offenses
against Minors,” Juvenile Justice Bulletin (Washington, DC: Office of Justice
Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2009).
   203
       “Adolescents Who Have Engaged in Abusive Sexual Behavior: Effective
Polices and Practices,” (Oregon: Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers
(ATSA). 2000). Accessed April 2022, www.atsa.com/ppjuvenile.html.
                                      1134
                                  APPENDIX V



significant, after reporting seek outside counsel for how to care well for all
parties involved. It is important that leaders be aware that statistically, a
juvenile offender is likely to have been first sexually abused themselves.
Therefore, the shepherd is likely to have two victims in his care, and quite
possibly the predator of the offended is in the victim's home or possibly in their
church.

    ●    Parent/caregiver

Approximately 30% of children who are sexually abused are abused by family
members. The younger the victim, the more likely it is that the abuser is a
family member. Of those molesting a child under six, 50% were family
members. Family members also accounted for 23% of those abusing children
ages 12 to 17.204 Approximately 77% percent of perpetrators of child abuse
and neglect are the parents of a victim.205 Family members206 make up one-
third to one-half of the perpetrators against girls, and 10% to 20% of the
perpetrators against boys.207 Men commit 90% of these cases.208

    ●    Stranger

The abuse by a stranger is less common, but its prevalence is still concerning.
Children often struggle to know who would be classified as a stranger. Once
the stranger tells the child their name, they no longer think of the person as a
stranger. Developmentally they do not assign motives to people and do not
pick up on someone's evil intentions. This makes children particularly
vulnerable to abuse by strangers.


   204
         D. Finkelhor, “Characteristics of Crimes against Juveniles” (Durham, NH:
Crimes against Children Research Center, 2012), 13. and J. Whealin, “Child Sexual
Abuse” (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, National Center for
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, (2007-05-22).
    205
        “Child Maltreatment 2016,” (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health &
Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, Administration on
Children, Youth and Families, Children’s Bureau, 2018). Child maltreatment 2016.
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/report/child-maltreatment-2016.
    206
        United States Department of Justice National Sex Offender Public Website,
“Facts and Statistics.” Accessed March 8, 2018, www.nsopw.gov/en-
US/Education/FactsStatistics.
    207
        D. Finkelhor, “Current Information on the Scope and Nature of Child Sexual
Abuse,” The Future of Children, vol. 4, no. 2 (Los Altos, CA: The David and Lucile
Packard Foundation, 1994), 31.
    208
        Ibid.
                                      1135
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Categories of recognition:

    ●   A child directly discloses they are being abused or neglected.

Examples:
"My dad touches my privates when mom's not around."
“Our youth pastor is asking me to send him nude pictures.”
“My mom does not feed us dinner.”

    ●   A child indirectly discloses information that might suggest they are a
        victim of abuse or neglect. This is the most common disclosure of
        abuse. In these cases, it is likely that the child is hinting at current
        abuse and hoping you will understand.

Examples of a disguised disclosure: “I have a cousin who is being abused.”
Example of a disclosure via hints or gestures: “My friend told me . . .”

    ●   A child accidentally discloses abuse or neglect.

Examples:
The child records written details regarding abuse.
You walk in on abuse taking place.
You overhear a teenager talking about their abuse.
A child exhibits physical signs of abuse.
You notice that a child does not have a doctor listed on their form.

    ●   A child’s behavior provides clues they might be a victim of abuse or
        neglect. (A parent or caregiver’s behavior might also make you alert
        to the fact that they are abusive.)

Examples:
A teenager consistently lingers after youth group meetings and delays going
home.
A toddler flinches when touched.
A child displays sexualized behavior.
A grade schooler is overly physically aggressive with his peers.
A child steals food from others.

Example of parent or caregiver behavior: A parent overtly rejects their child,
or another adult makes up excuses to be alone with a child.


                                     1136
                                  APPENDIX V



    ●   A child shows physical signs they may have been abused or
        neglected.

Examples:
A child has difficulty walking or sitting.
A child shows up in a grungy short-sleeved shirt without a jacket in winter.
A child has bodily injuries, and no plausible explanation is offered.
A child has burn marks or bruises that resemble objects such as a hand, fist,
belt buckle, or rope.

To further familiarize with the behavioral and physical indicators of abuse,
please see Attachment 4: Signs of Child Abuse. This attachment includes a
list of general behavioral clues and physical warning signs of child abuse. It
also includes specific details highlighting the unique indicators of physical
abuse, sexual abuse, and neglect.

When behavioral and physical signs are present, it does not always indicate
abuse. For example, a child who self-harms or has panic attacks is in distress
but not necessarily abused. Nonetheless, any concerning childhood behaviors
should heighten curiosity. It does not matter if it is abuse, these children still
need attention and care. Ministry leaders and workers must diligently train
staff and volunteers to recognize the signs of abuse; however, it is important
to note that up to forty percent of abused children will not exhibit any signs.

Difficulty in Disclosing

Often, children are reluctant to disclose. Inherent to this difficulty is that an
abuser may be in an intimate relationship with the child and/or someone the
child wants to protect. It is likely that the child has a complex connection with
the person perpetrating harm against them. Additionally, a child may remain
silent because they are afraid of negative reactions from adults, or of “getting
into trouble” with their abuser. This results in a variety of confusing
circumstances for those involved, including the question of why someone did
not report.

Why Children Do Not Disclose Abuse

    ●   The child may be instructed to keep the abuse a secret.
    ●   The child may be afraid to tell anyone.
    ●   The perpetrator may have threatened the child.
    ●   The child may not know who is safe to tell.
                                      1137
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●   The child may not know how to tell. For instance, they might lack the
        language needed to capture what is happening to them or to share all
        the complexities involved.
    ●   The child may be made to feel responsible for the abuse.
    ●   The person harming the child may have established an emotional
        connection with them and/or the family to lower inhibitions
        (“grooming,” see Attachment 1: “Definitions”).
    ●   The perpetrator may have convinced the child that abuse is normal.
    ●   The child may be convinced no one will believe them.
    ●   The child may have dissociated from the events. A victim’s mind may
        have difficulty reconciling what happened. To survive, abuse victims
        can involuntarily disconnect from their thoughts, feelings, memories,
        and surroundings. This makes it even more challenging for victims to
        accurately remember events, and timelines, or possess an absolute
        certainty about what occurred.
    ●   The child may love their abuser and desire to protect him or her.
    ●   The parents may categorize the abuse as “discipline” and have told the
        child it is God's command.
    ●   The child may not recognize what they are experiencing is abnormal
        because it has always been their reality.

Why Parents or Other Adults Neglect to Report Abuse

Adults might be aware of the abuse but also fail to address and/or report. The
following constitute common reasons.

    ●   Overwhelming feelings. They may be shocked, frightened, and/or
        angry.
    ●   Uncertainty. They may not know how to approach the problem.
    ●   Confusion. They may wonder, “Am I right?” “Did I really see/hear
        that?”
    ●   Trust. The abuser may seem trustworthy, so it is difficult to believe
        that this person they know (love, respect) is capable of child abuse.
    ●   Manipulation. They may have confronted the abuser, and he/she
        offered an alternative logical explanation.
    ●   Dependency. They may be physically, emotionally, and/or financially
        dependent on the child's abuser.
    ●   Self-doubt. They may question whether it is the right thing to do or if
        the abuse is really that bad.
    ●   Fear. They may fear for the child and what they will have to go
        through once the abuse is reported.
                                     1138
                                  APPENDIX V



    ●    Cost. They may be concerned about the cost, particularly if the abuser
         is another family member or a prominent member of the church or
         community.
    ●    Community Grooming. The abuser skillfully presents a wholesome,
         godly outward persona and skillfully handles Scripture and theology,
         causing other adults to believe it is not possible that the person in
         question could be an abuser.

Because of these multiple barriers, when a child discloses abuse, it is typically
a gradual revelation. Child abuse has many complex layers, and perpetrators
are masterful at deceit and manipulation. What we think we know about other
people, victims, and their families is inadequate when it comes to identifying
the presence of child abuse. The information disclosed must be mediated
without bias. It is essential for church leaders, workers, staff, and volunteers
to have familiarity with the clues that signal child abuse and neglect. (See
Attachment 4: Signs of Child Abuse.)

4. Responding to a Child Abuse Disclosure or Discovery

Complete confidence of abuse or neglect is not necessary for reporting. Nor is
it necessary to indicate which type of abuse has been perpetrated against a
child. Reasonable suspicion of child abuse is sufficient for engaging expert
investigation. Child abuse is both a serious sin and a crime. Ministering to
those harmed by sin is the responsibility of the church and exploration of crime
is the duty of the magistrate.

Disclosure of Child Abuse

Churches are not qualified to conduct investigations of child abuse. Local
authorities are specifically trained; therefore, all suspicion of abuse must be
reported immediately. Delay can result in loss of evidence, victim tampering,
tainting witness memory, or providing the perpetrator an opportunity to
threaten or pressure their victims to remain silent or recant their testimony.209
Conducting an “in-house” investigation prior to reporting not only jeopardizes
the child and the chain of evidence, it may also fail at detecting the actual
abuser. Abusers often continue offending; therefore, a church that conducts an
incompetent investigation may be held responsible. The church has a moral
and legal obligation to report suspected abuse.

   209
      Victor Vieth, “Resist and Report: The Temptation to Investigate,” GRACE,
accessed    December       2020. https://www.netgrace.org/resources/resisting-the-
temptation-to-investigation.
                                      1139
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



When a child discloses abuse, it is important to listen and act in a way that
supports the child and keeps him or her protected. God’s desire is to keep the
child safe (Matt. 19:13-5, Luke 17:2). While it is the responsibility of the
magistrate to investigate, in the moment of disclosure or discovery the church
must also provide care for the victim.

What to do regarding disclosure of child abuse:

    ●   Compile a short list of the appropriate local agencies and their phone
        numbers before an emergency occurs.
    ●   Listen to the child. Let the child explain what happened in his or her
        own words.
    ●   Limit questioning to the following:
             o What happened?
             o When did it happen?
             o Where did it happen?
             o Who did it?
             o How do you know them?
    ●   Take down as many direct quotes as possible.
    ●   Be supportive, compassionate, and affirm the child’s bravery.
             o “You did the right thing. I’m glad you told me.”
             o “You were very brave to tell me. I’m proud of you.”
             o “This was not your fault. You did nothing wrong.”
             o “I will help you.”
    ●   Reassure the child by telling them what you are going to do next
        and what will happen. The child will be afraid of the consequences
        of their disclosure, so let them know you will do your best to support
        and protect him or her. Explain to the child that, for their safety, you
        will need to report their experience to someone else and include those
        who will help. If the child is older, you can mention that you will be
        calling child protective services and/or the police.
    ●   Acknowledge limitations as pastors and church leaders.
    ●   Expect complexity. It is often difficult to see the situation clearly.
    ●   Acknowledge prejudice. Objectivity regarding allegations may be
        hard when the accused is someone familiar.
    ●   Make a report. Reporting is not an accusation, but rather a request
        to investigate. [See section 5: Reporting.]
    ●   Pray with and for the child. Pray Scripture. Psalm 46:1 ‒ God is
        our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Zephaniah 3:17
        ‒ The LORD your God is in your midst, a mighty one who will save.
        1 Peter 5:7 (NIV) ‒ Cast all your anxiety on Him because He cares for
                                     1140
                                  APPENDIX V



         you. Isaiah 41:10-11 ‒ Fear not, for I am with you; be not dismayed,
         for I am your God; I will strengthen you, I will help you, I will uphold
         you with My righteous right hand.

What not to do regarding disclosure of child abuse:

    ●    Refrain from making promises you cannot keep. Do not tell the child
         you won’t tell anyone.
    ●    Don’t stop the child in the middle of their story.
    ●    Don’t examine the child with questions, especially leading questions
         (any question in which you provide a possible answer). This is
         tampering with testimony, which will make investigation by
         authorities more difficult later in the process.
    ●    Don’t ask the child for details. A child might not be comfortable
         sharing all the details.
    ●    Don’t fear the mess of reporting. God promises to help with messes.

A survey of victims of abuse discovered that only 10% had a positive
experience when they disclosed their experience. In positive experiences, three
key features occurred during the disclosure:

         1. The recipient of disclosure believed the young person.
         2. The recipient of disclosure took some form of action in response.
         3. The young person received some form of emotional support to
            help them through the process.210

Beyond the Basics

The following are additional suggestions for providing comfort and care to a
child’s disclosure of abuse.

    ●    Meet in a suitable environment free from distractions.
    ●    Posture yourself at the child’s eye level and remain in an open
         position.
    ●    Remain calm and patient—allow for prolonged silence and give the
         child opportunity to be heard.


   210
       Debbie Allnock and Pam Miller, No one noticed, no one heard: a study of
disclosures of childhood abuse, 52, https://www.norfolklscb.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/no-one-noticed-no-one-heard-report.pdf, (accessed April
2022).
                                      1141
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    ●   Listen supportively. Stay focused on listening to the child rather than
        on how you will respond.
    ●   Respect that they may reveal only some of the details.
    ●   Reassure them it is OK they have told you.
    ●   Reassure them they are not at fault.
    ●   Reassure them they are not the cause of your distress.
    ●   Respond to urgent needs and notify appropriate authorities if you
        observe an injury.
    ●   Do not ask to invite someone else into the conversation. They have
        chosen to trust you.
    ●   Ask if you can pray for God's comfort and help for them. Don’t assume
        they are comfortable with prayer. Keep it short and focused on praying
        for their immediate needs.
    ●   Ask them how you can help.

In the case of an accidental disclosure of abuse, or the physical and behavioral
signs are obvious, make a report based on your observations. If you are not
able to follow up with the child, keep notes on what you heard or observed.
If you receive an accusation that child abuse has been committed by someone
you know, work with, or is in an authoritative position, resist the temptation to
think about your own well-being. Stay present with the child and tend to his or
her needs. Focus on their disclosure. After tending to the needs of the victim,
consider how you will respond personally to the disclosure.

Independent Assessments or Investigations

Outside perspective is critical because it is so difficult to see clearly when
abuse is part of the culture in which we are immersed. Rather than viewing
outside help as a threat or liability, seeking wise counsel models the wisdom
of Proverbs 1:3, 5 and demonstrates a heart humbly committed to truth,
holiness, justice, and compassion. Outside counsel should be welcomed (not
feared) as sharpening the church’s response.

There are three main situations when outside counsel might be invaluable.




                                      1142
                                  APPENDIX V



1. When a decision needs to be made

         Rationale:
         When a specific step211 is necessary to move the case forward, and
         certainty is required, an outside expert evaluation of the evidence may
         provide clarity. Outside investigation also helps confirm initial
         perceptions in a situation which created any doubt regarding the
         alleged abuse.

2. When the alleged abuser was a volunteer, staff member or pastor, on
   church grounds, or in the context of a church event

         Rationale:
         In any of these situations, outside help is critical for providing
         confidence to move forward with specific action related to an abuser.
         The church needs outside help to guide what steps need to be taken
         with a volunteer, staff member or pastor. The church cannot keep them
         on staff, or on hold, waiting for a police investigation that takes two
         to five years and is not likely to result in charges.

         If the abuser is no longer in the church, the disclosure may trigger the
         question of whether there are things that were missed (or possibly even
         other victims). See number three below.

3. When there are allegations or reason to believe that warning signs were
   missed by leaders in the church, or disclosures mishandled

         Rationale:
         Allegations may arise in a context that involve individuals who are no
         longer at the church, but where there is possibility that there was poor
         policy that allowed the abuse. Warning signs may have been missed
         by leaders in the church or allegations that disclosures were
         mishandled.

         Even if the abuse, possible mishandling, or failure to report occurred
         years or decades prior, outside counsel is vital for several reasons:



   211
       For example: supporting a victim who divorces an abusive spouse, bringing
charges against an abuser, firing a staff member, or assisting in removing the
ordination of an allegedly abusive pastor.
                                      1143
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        •   Survivors, deeply wounded by the abuse, deserve to know the
            truth.
        •   When multiple errors occur, repentance is a biblical requirement.
        •   A church or ministry that displays God’s heart will desire truth
            and be zealous in righteousness. This includes ensuring any
            necessary changes to policies, practices, or culture. Often, when
            abuse is mishandled, there are entrenched beliefs and patterns that
            contribute. Unless this faulty worldview or breakdown in policies
            or practices is clearly identified and corrected, and even if it
            developed unintentionally, abuse will continue. Where the church
            has failed, even under past leadership, public confession and
            repentance is in order as exemplified by the nation of Israel (2
            Chron. 29:3-11).

What To Look for in Seeking Outside Counsel

Individuals and/or firms should meet the following basic criteria:

        •   Substantial training, skill, and experience with abuse, trauma, and
            related dynamics, as well as experience with investigative
            techniques and handling evidence. A consistent and trusted
            reputation in the survivor and advocate community. Enlisting
            those with a positive standing will help a ministry build trust with
            abuse survivors.
        •   Clearly identify and act as assessors, educators, or investigators,
            not legal representation, even if they are licensed legal
            professionals. Retaining someone as an attorney immediately
            creates an adversarial relationship between the ministry and the
            survivor, even if unintentional. This is because when an
            attorney/client relationship is formed, it creates obligations and
            privileges between the hiring entity and the attorney. Attorneys
            owe a fiduciary obligation to the ministry as a corporation or
            business, not to the church as God’s people, and certainly not to
            the survivors and their families. The attorney/client relationship
            also creates confidentiality and legal privileges designed to protect
            and hide information. The creation of these privileges is
            commonly used to obscure information and protect assets against
            liability. It demonstrates a focused financial priority rather than
            that of transparency or seeking justice and truth.


                                     1144
                                  APPENDIX V



5. Reporting Child Abuse and Neglect

Knowing when and to whom to file a report, and what to include may be
overwhelming during a crisis. This section will address these questions as well
as what to do if victims and/or families hesitate to report.

When Does a Report Need To Be Filed?

Each state’s laws vary and should be consulted prior to a crisis. In general, law
and best practices indicate a policy of reporting whenever there is reason to
suspect child abuse or neglect. Note the standard is not knowledge of abuse or
neglect but rather reason to believe. This includes cases with warning signs,
indirect disclosures, reason to believe, red flags, and common behaviors of
trauma. (See Attachment 4: Signs of Child Abuse for a detailed list of possible
warning signs.)

Disclosures are often incomplete or concealed. The likelihood that signs of
abuse will be missed also happens. Likewise, misconceptions about abuse and
neglect can lead to improperly categorizing behaviors and patterns into benign
habits or “struggles.” Pastoral counsel, handled inappropriately, can
inadvertently become complicit. It is critical for church leaders, staff, and
volunteers to be well-versed in the warning signs, indirect disclosures, reason
to believe, red flags, and common behaviors of trauma.

While best policy is that a report be made “immediately,” or within 24 hours
of the events initiating the need to report, risk of danger may also be a concern.
If there is any reason to fear the safety of the victims, it is unwise they be in
close proximity to their abuser before or after a report is made. This is
particularly true in cases where the alleged abuser is the parent of the victim.
This danger frequently extends to the wife as well. Moving a wife and children
to a secure location may be wise before or contemporaneously when filing a
report with law enforcement and CPS. An emergency plan should be
established in the church prior to the need. Leadership must be aware of
locations where a family can be moved safely, how to make such a move, and
what will be done to care for their basic needs during this transition.

Reason to Believe

The standard of “reason to believe” child abuse may be occurring is initiated
when an adult reports childhood abuse and the alleged abuser continues to have
access to children. An example would be when an adult reported abuse by a
                                      1145
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



previous Sunday school teacher who remains in close proximity to children.
Statistics indicate an increased likelihood of ongoing abuse. This is
particularly true in cases of sexual abuse. It is counter to research and evidence
to assume an abuser ceased abusing, or only abuses in certain contexts.

This mistake is particularly common in situations when an adult survivor
discloses childhood sexual abuse by a parent or sibling. The assumption is that
abuse within a family will stay in the family and there is little risk if no children
remain in the home. Statistically this is not the case. If the alleged abuser has
access to children, there is “reason to believe” child abuse may be ongoing.

For example, “Jane” discloses that her father “John” sexually abused her as a
child. All of John’s children are grown and no minors remain in the home.
However, John volunteers at an after-school program. “Reason to believe”
advises child abuse continues because John has access to children and an
alleged history of sexually assaulting a child. Notice, even though John’s
access to children isn’t within your ministry or church, the need to report
remains. Having possession of this information establishes a reasonable belief.

Finally, it is critical to understand that the “reason to believe” standard does
not require that organizational or personal investigation should be attempted
to determine the merits of the allegations or warning signs before reporting.
Rather, a report should be made immediately.

To Whom to Report

First, it is important to know your state law and ensure you follow all legal
requirements for reporting suspected child abuse. Under most circumstances,
you will be legally required to file a report either with Child Protective
Services, or the police department, or both.

In the rare event you encounter a situation where you are not legally required
to report, and the survivor, parent, or caregiver prefers to file the report
themselves, agency should be given to make that choice. Note however, that
if they are willing, it is always helpful for the person who received the
disclosure or observed the potential evidence of abuse to also file a report and
offer to make a statement to police and, if relevant, Child Protective Services.
This helps ensure that all corroborating information is received by the correct
authorities.



                                        1146
                                     APPENDIX V



The following are agencies to whom you should report, or which may provide
helpful assistance in reporting.

    •     Law Enforcement Agency

Reports of any potential criminal activity should be made first and foremost to
law enforcement. Criminal activity can include (but not be limited to) neglect,
threats, and other actions such as imprisonment, which do not involve physical
contact.

    •     Child Protective Services (CPS)

Report to CPS in any context where an abuser may be harming a child under
his or her care. CPS and police serve two very different functions in our legal
system. A call to CPS alone is insufficient and will not likely result in a
criminal investigation. CPS’s jurisdiction is specifically related to protecting
children in the custodial care of the abuser. They do not investigate or evaluate
crimes, but rather focus specifically on whether an adult is fit to have custodial
care of a child. Immediately report every suspected case of abuse to law
enforcement and then immediately report to CPS in the case of minor children
in the abuser’s custody or care. This includes situations where the reporting
victim is not a family member, but there are children in the care of the abuser.
For example, a student may report abuse by her teacher, and the teacher is a
parent of minor children.

    •     Local Child Advocacy Center

Child Advocacy Centers are often significantly helpful resources as well, and
a call to them may provide insight and guidance for reporting as well. Child
advocacy centers are staffed with trauma-trained investigators, medical
personnel, and counselors, and are designed to feel as safe and non-threatening
as possible for a child.212 Children’s advocates provide guidance and support
in the reporting process, investigative help to law enforcement, counseling
services to victims and families, and advocacy support through the legal
process. Advocates may only take referrals from police departments, but others
initiate the investigative process and then refer to law enforcement. When the
initial call is made to law enforcement, it is helpful to ask the department if
they coordinate with a local children’s advocate and, if so, request to connect


   212
         https://www.nationalcac.org/find-a-cac/.
                                         1147
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



the child’s family. Work with law enforcement through the advocate as much
as possible.

    •   Guardian Ad Litem

If a Guardian Ad Litem is already involved in the child's life, it is helpful to
reach out to them, if possible, to also report any suspected abuse, as the
Guardian is tasked with representing the child's interests in court.

    •   Additional Agencies

It may also be appropriate to contact licensing agencies, such as medical
boards for doctors, Title IX investigators for schools, and human resource
departments for businesses while a report is made. These reports should be
made with the victim or family’s consent and not made until after law
enforcement has been notified and the police have notified the alleged
perpetrator of the police report to ensure that any criminal investigation is not
jeopardized.

    •   Pastors, Sessions, and Presbyteries

Church and ministry leaders should aid in filing the report. This helps give
legal weight to the report, and the individual who heard the disclosure may
need to serve as a witness in the proceeding as disclosures can become
important pieces of evidence.

Relevant agencies such as the police and CPS (if a custodial relationship is
involved) should be contacted with a clear statement that the call is being made
to report suspected child abuse. All information that has been obtained should
be given to the detectives, and any physical evidence turned over to
investigators.

When contacting these agencies, it is wise to ask the following:

    •   If the department coordinates with a local Child Advocacy Center and,
        if so, how to connect the child and their family with that center;
    •   What the process is for bringing the child in to give a statement.
        (Ideally this will be done through the Child Advocacy Center, but that
        is not always available.)


                                      1148
                                 APPENDIX V



This call should not be made in front of the young child, but it is wise to ask
the guardian of the child if they would like someone to go with them when
they go to file a statement or be interviewed.

Pastors should clearly document the report in writing, noting the date and time
they called, who they spoke with, what they reported, and any instructions they
received. Documentation of the report should be kept in church files, and any
additional measures taken or interaction with law enforcement or CPS should
be routinely documented and filed along with notation of the initial report

How and What to Report

Once the need to report has been triggered, a phone call should be made to the
relevant police department (and CPS if the child is in the care of the abuser or
the abuser has custodial care of minor children), to file a report of suspected
child abuse. A preliminary call to the local Child Advocacy Center is also
highly recommended as this often yields additional guidance or support when
reporting to law enforcement. If the child is a victim of domestic violence or
is in the custody of an abuser, a local domestic violence shelter may also
provide helpful information on protecting an abused spouse or child, while
reporting the abuse.

If you suspect the child or spouse may be in danger if you report, seek expert
help from these sources as well as law enforcement by calling them and letting
them know that a report of abuse or suspected abuse needs to be made and that
there is reason to believe filing a report will put a child or spouse in danger.
Law enforcement may provide some assistance, but you are more likely to
receive concrete expert help on safety during reporting, from a domestic
violence shelter and/or child advocacy center.

When reaching out to law enforcement and CPS (if needed), state that the call
is to report child abuse or suspected child abuse. Describe the specific events
that caused you to report. Report any questionable or concerning behaviors
observed in the victim or with the alleged perpetrator and notify the
investigators of any known witnesses. All physical evidence must also be
turned over to the investigative team. Retain copies where possible. Provide
any information which may help complete the picture for investigators without
personally filling in the gaps or using conjecture. Reports should be clear,
factual, and complete. Include names and contact information for additional
witnesses. Maintain a record of to whom, when, and what was reported.


                                     1149
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



In the event that a spouse and minor children must be moved to a safe location
prior to filing a report, church leadership should seek legal help from a
domestic violence shelter or skilled family law attorney who can assist in
obtaining the necessary protective orders. If the abused spouse has already
retained skilled legal counsel, the church should notify the retained attorney
and seek help obtaining protective orders. Emergency removal of an abused
spouse and child for their safety can have legal implications in a custody
dispute or separation/divorce proceeding. In some cases, the spouse who is
protecting the child/children may not be legally allowed to shield them from
court-ordered visitations with a parent, even if abuse is alleged and a report
made. Violating a court order can result in the protecting parent being in
contempt of court or facing criminal charges or allegations of parental
alienation. Because these are legally complex issues with potentially
significant ramifications, involve an attorney skilled in family law, custody
issues, and abuse prior to a crisis. Attorneys help guide and advise the process
of protecting a spouse and minor children in a way that best protects their legal
rights.

Congregations and Others Needing Notification

Families with children outside the church context who may have been in
contact with the alleged abuser should also be notified. Also consider the
families with children in the alleged abuser’s profession or any other voluntary
capacity.

When an allegation of sexual abuse is made against someone in the church,
recognize the likelihood there may be other victims. Additional people in the
congregation may have other details important to the investigation.
Notification is not a determination of guilt; it is the necessary means for
ensuring a proper investigation. Investigations are incomplete without this
wide-ranging information. The intent is not to slander a person, rather it is to
give true statements about a report regarding an individual. A policy of
reporting allegations for the purpose of ensuring a fair and just investigation,
helps communicate clearly to your congregation that these routine processes
are not determinations of guilt, but rather are standard protective and policy
measures that are followed for all individuals.

All families with children who may have been in contact with the abuser must
be notified quickly after reporting to law enforcement and CPS. This includes
families with children in any church-associated community groups.
Notification should occur as quickly as possible but should not occur before
                                      1150
                                  APPENDIX V



the alleged abuser is aware that a report has been filed. Once the abuser is
aware of the report, there is no benefit, and significant detriment, to failing to
properly notify relevant communities and individuals.

If sexual abuse is alleged and the abuser was ever in leadership, a volunteer in
the church, or has a circle of connection within the church that is difficult to
very clearly identify or notify on an individual basis, the entire congregation
must be notified using multiple formats. This includes, but is not limited to,
the church email list and an announcement before services. This is also true
for nonsexual criminal child abuse which took place in the alleged offender’s
role in the church: for example, a childcare worker who allegedly hit a child
during Sunday school.

When the report is filed, inform police and CPS you will be notifying anyone
whose children were in contact with the alleged abuser. Find out when the
alleged abuser will be aware a report has been filed. In some cases,
investigators may need to do preliminary work before the abuser is aware that
he or she is under investigation. In these instances, investigators may ask you
not to notify anyone so as not to compromise the investigation. However, once
the alleged abuser is aware of the report, do not postpone or delay notification.
There is no benefit from, and indeed great harm in, postponing or delaying
notification.

Notifications should:

    ●   Protect the identity of the victim and witnesses. For example, in a case
        when the victim is the child of the alleged abuser, identify the victim
        as “a child who has a close relationship with the family.”
    ●   Identify the type(s) of abuse alleged without using minimizing
        language. For example, use terms such as physical sexual abuse,
        videotaping, photographing, exposure, showing the child
        pornography, engaging in sexually explicit conversations or
        communications, etc. Words do not need to be graphic, but they should
        identify the range of the alleged abuses. This may also help alert others
        with information or red flags they may not previously have
        recognized.
    ●   Identify the general context of the abuse as much as possible while
        continuing to protect the victim. For example, “the allegations relate
        to events that took place with a minor where X teaches,” or “these
        allegations were brought by a family who attends our church, though
        the alleged abuse took place in a non-church context,” or “these
                                      1151
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        allegations relate to events that took place during our youth retreat,”
        etc.
    ●   Provide clear instructions for anyone else with information. Provide
        contact information for a detective and CPS worker and/or direct those
        with relevant information to reach out immediately.
    ●   Clearly identify the boundaries for the alleged abuser.

Notify law enforcement and CPS and describe the specific events that caused
you to report. Report any questionable or concerning behaviors observed in
the victim or with the alleged perpetrator and notify the investigators of any
known witnesses. All physical evidence must also be turned over to the
investigative team. Retain copies where possible. Provide any information
which may help complete the picture for investigators without personally
filling in the gaps or using conjecture. Reports should be clear, factual, and
complete. Include names and contact information for additional witnesses.
Maintain a record of to whom, when, and what was reported.

What If the Victim or Their Family Does Not Want To Report?

The following represent several difficulties in reporting.

    •   The marriage, close relationship, and/or family will be impacted
        significantly.
    •   The non-abusive spouse may fear for their safety.
    •   The non-abusive spouse may have a desire to protect the abusive
        spouse from harm.
    •   The non-abusive spouse may have guilt for “damaging” the abusive
        spouse.
    •   There is a risk to children who remain within the abuser’s care or
        reach.
    •   Multiple adult victims of childhood abuse come forward while other
        survivors prefer not to file.

The process of reporting abuse is traumatic. Help victims and their families
understand from a positive perspective, carefully explaining why a report
needs to be made. Note: At times law enforcement or CPS will not investigate
a report unless the victim is a willing participant. However, a report should
nonetheless be made.

    •   Assure those involved that reporting prevents further abuse of the
        child and potentially other children.
                                      1152
                                  APPENDIX V



    •   Reassure the victim and their family of your help and support,
        including a concrete plan or action steps through the process.
    •   Whenever possible, give the victim and their family choices. Abuse
        robs a victim of their voice and autonomy. Therefore, provide input
        that helps them make wise decisions while retaining their agency. The
        goal is to unite and report quickly, while simultaneously maintaining
        support of the victims and their families.
    •   If unity is not possible, a report should still be filed. Notify the victim
        you will not disclose identifying information. Inform law enforcement
        and CPS that you remain in contact with the victim and are
        encouraging them to participate in the investigation. While involving
        the victim in the process is preferred, an anonymous report provides
        the authorities with crucial information for additional victims already
        reporting or who may report in the future.
    •   Assure those involved you understand their choice and are ready to
        support and assist if they do choose to speak with investigators.
    •   In a case when survivors above the age of majority do not wish to
        report, the report should be made on behalf of the minor children or
        adults willing to participate. Notify the authorities that there are
        additional survivors alleging abuse who are not yet prepared to come
        forward. Do not provide identifying information, simply make law
        enforcement aware that other survivors are known. Knowledge that
        the perpetrator has multiple victims may help the investigation be
        taken seriously and prioritized.
    •   Support survivors who do report without compromising the choice of
        an adult survivor who does not want to participate in the process.
    •   It may be helpful to accompany the survivor and/or parents, but it is
        not a substitute for actual participation in the reporting process.

6. Redemptive Shepherding

Working with victims and the dynamics of abuse presents an incredible
opportunity to bring redemption and light, and to display the gospel to hurting
members of the flock. God shows concern for the broken-hearted (Ps. 147:3)
and He is not silent in the face of evil (Ps. 94:14-17; 97:10; Eph. 5:11-12). His
people must also lovingly and carefully shepherd those impacted from the evil
of abuse. Protecting the weak and vulnerable is the responsibility of all God’s
people (Ps. 82:3-4; Isa. 1:17; Prov. 31:8-9).

All caregiving has potential for error. There is even the possibility of causing
additional harm.
                                      1153
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



One example for how this might happen in shepherding victims suffering from
abuse is, when they come forward, it is common for those involved to consider
the accused with “charitable judgment.” People are generally hesitant to
violate the “innocent until proven guilty” standard. While God’s people are
called to love one another and “believe all things” (1 Cor. 13:7), err on the side
of safety when it comes to protecting the vulnerable. Research shows children
rarely report false abuse, particularly sexual abuse. Therefore, take the steps
necessary to restrict the alleged abuser’s access to children, report the
allegations, and notify the church. Allow law enforcement to investigate and
make any legal judgments.

Be aware however, that it is unlikely that law enforcement investigations will
provide useful conclusions in any reasonable time frame. While the rate of
false reports is incredibly low (only between 2-8% of alleged sexual abuse
reports are false), only approximately five to seven out of every 300 rapes
reported to police will result in criminal charges and conviction. Additionally,
this process is likely to take two or more years on average. Helpful conclusions
from CPS are even less likely to be clear and prompt.

It is likely that church leaders will need to take steps or make decisions long
before any helpful results from a police report are obtained. For example,

    •   will the church assist a spouse in separating from an allegedly abusive
        spouse prior to conviction for abuse?
    •   will ecclesiastical charges be raised against an abusive elder absent
        criminal conviction?

Redemptive shepherding may at times require a level of care or support that
entails reaching determinations about the parties involved before law
enforcement concludes the investigation. Law enforcement should always be
notified and supported in the investigative process, but shepherding is not
dependent on the result. In these cases, seeking help from outside agencies
(child advocacy centers, domestic violence shelters, independent investigative
agencies where appropriate) may be helpful.

Failure to take these steps of protection leaves children at risk during the
investigation and potentially suppresses evidence. The failure of those in
authority to respond swiftly and concisely may suggest to the victim that the
authority thinks the victim is lying. Survivors who sense this resistance will
quickly shut down or may retract allegations out of fear.

                                      1154
                                 APPENDIX V



Shepherding the Victim and Family

There are multiple practical needs which need to be met; however, people
involved in the situation are hurting deeply and need connection. Grieve with
them, ask intelligent questions about how they are, pray with them, or visit.
Enlist other members in the church to do the same. While care should be taken
not to overpromise or offer false hope, remind the family that God sees and
knows all things and has not left them alone. Listen to their lead as you follow
up, but don’t simply wait for them to reach out or identify what they need.

When people are abused, the ability to see and clearly comprehend the
situation is dramatically hindered. It often requires substantial time and
distance from an abusive situation to fully recognize and articulate what
happened. Understand that this means that information is likely to flow out in
small increments as the survivor begins to feel safe in disclosing and is given
enough time and space from the abuse to begin articulating what they have
experienced as abnormal and wrong. This does not mean the survivor's story
is "made-up" or "changing.” This is a normal reality when coming out of
trauma.

Practical Care for the Victim and Family

The families of victims are often overwhelmed simply trying to process the
abuse, parent their wounded child, and care for their other children. Their life
now consists of making police reports, attending multiple court hearings, and
dealing with the interpersonal dynamics of the abuser’s community. Added to
these, they may be overwhelmed with managing life’s normal demands.

Prior to a crisis, leaders and staff should familiarize with typical problems
victims and their families encounter and how the church can help with support
and/or practical involvement. It is difficult for families to discern what they
need amid so much grief, or even how to communicate these needs. They
likely will not know what options are available. Church leaders who
proactively pursue care and help provide practical guidance through the church
or community resources can be an incredible gift.

    •   In cases involving a custodial parent, determine that parent’s financial
        situation.
    •   Have a plan for how your church will help those without financial
        resources and/or other necessities if there is an alleged abusive spouse
        who cannot or refuses to provide support.
                                     1155
               MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



•   Help with childcare responsibilities so that the children aren’t forced
    into contact with the alleged abusive spouse during school pick-up or
    drop-off, or if they need transportation to an appointment.
•   Care for other children in the home when the victim is required to
    appear in court, attend investigative meetings, and/or receive
    counseling.
•   Care for the children while the parent/parents/caregivers take time
    away to regroup or grieve the circumstances.
•   Help the children and/or custodial parent find professional counseling
    if needed.
•   Provide a schedule for the delivery of meals.
•   Provide emotional support and/or physical support when the victim
    and/or family is working through judicial process.
•   If the abuse occurred on church property or during a church event, or
    was perpetrated by a staff member or volunteer, insurance funds may
    be available to help provide counseling for the victim. Assign
    someone with expertise in insurance dynamics to proactively work
    with the church insurance representative and obtain the maximum
    amount available to assist the family.
•   Proactively pursue an insurance claim to help meet the need for trauma
    care. Trauma therapy is almost always needed for extended periods of
    time and is often out of reach for most families. Do not wait for the
    family to ask the church to take this step. The family should not be
    placed in the position of having to work with the insurance company
    themselves.
•   Have a plan for communication and provide a spokesperson for the
    family to ensure their needs are met and care is provided.
•   Determine how the rest of the pastoral staff and deacons will be
    notified of needs and kept updated.
•   Keep very careful records of all communication.
•   Communicate regularly.
•   Have a prepared list of resources with which you are familiar in the
    community that can walk alongside the victim and their family.
    Children’s Advocacy Centers, domestic violence shelters, legal aid
    clinics, and government resources such as Medicaid and SNAP can all
    be helpful in providing support on multiple practical levels.
•   Have a prepared list of professionals in the community with whom
    you are familiar such as therapists, trauma counselors, family law
    attorneys, and intervention groups for abusers.


                                 1156
                                   APPENDIX V



    •   Ensure that the alleged offender does not have continued access to
        children in the church environment. If the alleged offender is a church
        attendee or volunteer, immediately relieve the alleged offender from
        all church responsibilities and access to children. This includes all
        leadership roles, including volunteer leadership roles, until the
        conclusion of the investigation.

In the family context, this means doing what can be done to separate the
alleged abusive parent from the rest of the family. It is usually easier and better
to move the alleged abuser to a new location if they will agree to leave, and if
the remaining spouse and children will be safe in that location. If the offending
spouse is able to be moved, consider that this likely involves practical steps
such as changing the door locks on the home. Otherwise, the non-offending
spouse and child will need to be moved to an undisclosed and secure location.

Resist fear for how the circumstances will impact the reputation of your
ministry or Christ. Christ does not need protection; He wants obedience.
Protecting a ministry or institution instead of people fails to recognize that our
identity is in Christ alone, and the ministry is His.

Failure to demonstrate God’s heart for truth, justice, and the vulnerable
ultimately destroys our witness and ministry. Jesus laid down His life, and we
are called to similarly lay down our lives and reputation for the good of others.

7. Child Abuse Prevention

God's desire is that all children be protected. One of the ways He arranged for
their care, nurture, and protection is the family. Parents are the primary
caretakers, and they need good resources to help them steward their role well.
Leaders should encourage parents who are the primary caretakers of their
children in their teaching, protecting discipline, and training (Deut. 6:7; Eph.
6:4). Churches can assist parents by providing resources to teach children
about abuse prevention from a Christian worldview.

Since most child abuse occurs inside the victim's home, the church can help
parents who may struggle to parent wisely, discipline lovingly, recognize
abuse, or provide for their children. The church can play a significant role in
addressing potential weaknesses and prevent any abuse and neglect that might
happen in the home as part of their Christian discipleship.



                                       1157
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



How the Church Can Assist Parents in Child Abuse Prevention

    ●   Teach parents to be present and caring parents. Children need to
        know that they are loved and cared for in order to prevent abuse, but
        also to feel comfortable reporting to their parents.
    ●   Support the hard work of parenting. Assist parents when they
        become overwhelmed. Consider teaching discipline methods and
        successful parenting strategies. Help parents raise children in a way
        that reflects Christ’s love and care.
    ●   Help disadvantaged families make connections with your
        benevolence and gain access to medical care or community resources.
        This can help prevent issues related to neglect, especially when a
        family lacks resources.
    ●   Host seminars for parents who have not had the benefit of learning
        godly parenting. Sanctifying their behaviors with their children bears
        witness to their faith.
    ●   Talk to members about monitoring their child’s phone, television,
        video, and internet viewing/usage. Inform parents of the risk to their
        children as they interact online. Teach ways they can shepherd their
        children as they engage with technology.
    ●   Develop a recommended reading list or supply the church library
        with books that help parents think biblically about parenting and
        difficult issues that might arise in a child’s development.
    ●   Publish a recommended resource list for abuse prevention
        materials. Many parents want to talk to their children about sex abuse
        prevention but do not know how. Abuse Prevention is most successful
        when children are taught about body safety and healthy boundaries
        and are encouraged to openly communicate about sexual matters.
        Resources are available for parents to read directly with their children.
        (See Annotated Bibliography.)

How the Church Can Prevent Child Abuse

The protection of children should be a multi-pronged approach that reflects
that we cherish and love the children God has gifted us (Ps. 127:3). A church
should seek to be a safe environment for children where they can learn about
the Lord (Prov. 22:6; Mark 9:42). We want to model for children how
Christians are called to love God and one another (Matt. 5:16; 1 Cor. 11:1)
Further, we protect the reputation of Christ when we seek to protect children
from abuse as it showcases our desire to live in a manner that is above reproach
and in line with our faith (Matt. 18:6; Phil. 4:8-9).
                                      1158
                                APPENDIX V




   ● Create and implement a child abuse policy. See section on creating
       a comprehensive Child Protection Plan.
   ● Train staff, leaders, and volunteers to recognize and report child
       abuse. If you do not have the means for training, consider bringing in
       an outside organization or program.
   ●   Insist on background checks for staff and members who work with
       children and teenagers.
   ●   Be known for reporting suspected abuse or neglect.
   ●   Communicate to the congregation that pastoral staff are trained and
       willing to intervene when abuse is suspected or reported.
   ●   Clearly articulate abuse as a sin. Teach that God hates abuse and
       calls His people to protect the vulnerable.
   ●   Clarify that abuse is not a private issue. The church should welcome
       the exposure of evil and be willing to work with the local government
       (Rom. 13).
   ●   Teach your church's theology of abuse.
   ●   Require your leaders to model exemplary sexual lives. Because of
       their high calling, high visibility, and high influence among us, pastors
       and other church leaders should be expected to live godly lives (Titus
       1:5-9).
   ●   Address tangential issues such as pornography and other media
       which eroticize violence.
   ●    Extend education to children and teenagers. Teach them how to
       recognize and report abuse. Children should understand that, while the
       Bible tells children to obey their parents, the biblical command for
       obedience is conditional (Eph. 6:1) and it is good and godly to expose
       sin.

8. Case Studies

Amanda

At first, Amanda was flattered. Peter, the high school varsity soccer coach,
made a point of cheering specifically for her at soccer games. Peter also
volunteered in the youth ministry at her church, so he came to the
underclassmen games to “support” the players who attended youth group.
Though she was only a sophomore, Peter was interested in everything she did.
He would even send her encouraging text messages during the day. Peter
always shared solid biblical wisdom with her when she faced any challenges
in school. Peter was good-looking, and his attention kind of felt nice.
                                     1159
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




In her junior year, Peter was one of Amanda’s soccer coaches. He continued
to text tips for how to improve her game and offered to help by setting up a
practice session specifically for her before youth group. When Amanda
declined because her mom worked during the day and wouldn’t be able to
drive that early, Peter offered to pick her up. He even said he would bring her
home after youth group.

As time went on, Peter would share personal information with Amanda.
During one of their car rides, he told her he was having problems in his
marriage. He said his wife just didn’t understand him. He told Amanda she
was jealous of all his sports and “hobbies.” She’d complain about the time he
spent volunteering at church. Peter then shared his admiration of Amanda’s
sports knowledge, finesse, and agility. “You’re going to make some guy an
amazing wife one day,” he encouraged.

Eventually the topic of their conversations turned to Amanda and her interest
in boys. Amanda began confiding in Peter. One day, she was crying about
some guy she liked and how he had treated her poorly. Peter offered a hug. To
Amanda, his hug felt a little too long and way too tight, but she felt bad for
being suspicious of Peter’s intent. She was confused though; the relationship
was beginning to make her uneasy.

Peter’s attentiveness toward Amanda increased over time. Hugs became
routine and lasted longer. Amanda wasn’t sure what to do about it. One day,
he asked Amanda if she could keep a secret. He confessed he had developed
feelings for her and if he even saw her picture on social media, it would lift
him from his depression. Amanda told him she was very uncomfortable with
the conversation and did not want to hear any more. But Peter said she treated
him like a boyfriend. All the time they spent together and all the secrets she
shared made Peter want more. He told her it was only right for him to desire
physical affection too. He said all he needed was for her to sit on his lap and
give him a hug. A hug would help his depression, he said, and the closeness
would help him feel so much better. Amanda timidly complied.

As their relationship grew, Peter assured Amanda she was in the driver's seat.
He convinced her she had pursued the relationship with him. Yet each week,
he advanced their contact physically. When Amanda hesitated, he threatened
to expose her for manipulating him. He said he would tell everyone she was
sexting him. Peter said he really didn’t want to do that because he knew her
feelings for him were genuine. But he insisted she must continue to keep the
                                     1160
                                 APPENDIX V



relationship secret so that no one could accuse him of having a favorite player.
If people were aware they were a “couple,” it would jeopardize her chances of
getting a college soccer scholarship.

Amanda was both confused and frightened. She knew what she did was wrong,
but she did not recognize Peter’s manipulation. Amanda didn’t know she was
being abused. She believed Peter’s lies that she was responsible for the
relationship and feared what would happen if anyone knew. In addition, she
was afraid of hurting him since she genuinely cared. On top of it, Amanda
knew Peter’s wife. She couldn’t imagine causing her to suffer. Amanda had
nowhere to turn.

Brainstorming questions for help developing best practices:

    1. What structures and/or procedures should your church or ministry
       already have in place in case a situation like this occurs?
    2. Upon discovering the circumstances, what will you do first?
    3. What will you do next?
    4. Who can you call for help navigating all the details?
    5. Who in your church is versed in abuse and compassionate to care for
       the victim and/or her family?
    6. What action steps will you take against the perpetrator?
    7. What will you tell the congregation and how?
    8. How will you determine if an outside agency will be helpful for this
       case?

Jane

Jane is a young mother in your church with three small children. The oldest is
3 years old; there’s an 18-month-old, and the baby was born 6 months ago.
Jane is disoriented about some of the things that are happening in her home.
She doesn’t think her husband’s behavior is right, but she’s unclear how to
explain or if she’s gossiping if she shares.

Mark, Jane’s husband, has always been controlling. Often, he isolates her from
friends and family. Sometimes he monitors her whereabouts on “Find My
Friends.” If she’s even the slightest bit late in coming home when she said,
Jane knows there will be consequences. She’s learned to live with Mark’s
unrealistic demands, but when it comes to the children, she’s a bit more
concerned. The little ones just don’t quite understand why Daddy is always so
frustrated and angry. One of the things that disturbs Jane is that Mark
                                     1161
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



disconnects the heat if he thinks they are spending too much money warming
the house in the winter. Jane often carries the baby in the Ergo just to keep
them both warm.

More disturbing, however, are the discipline practices Mark uses. Before they
had kids, Jane didn’t know what Mark believed was appropriate for
disciplining children. For instance, Mark insisted it was about time the baby
was sleep trained. So, if she cries at night, he goes into the nursery, picks her
up, and squeezes her little body so tight she cannot cry or make a sound. Mark
won’t release the infant until she stops struggling or trying to cry. Mark says
this teaches the baby Mark is in charge and that she ought not cry at night.
When Jane becomes distressed at the scene and expresses concern, Mark
demands she submit to his authority and leave the room.

Jane is equally concerned about Mark’s behavior with the toddlers. The 18-
month-old is “spanked” with a leather strap for even the smallest infraction—
everything from not coming down a steep flight of stairs by herself when Mark
wanted her to learn to climb down on her own, to spilling her sippy cup at
dinner time. Sometimes the leather strap leaves visible welts on her small
bottom that last for days. Once, Jane photographed the welts and documented
fingerprint bruises on the arms of her three-year-old. Her son told Jane that
Daddy grabbed him after he disobeyed. Mark has even been known to deprive
the two older children of dinner or other meals as a punishment.

Jane is scared, but she doesn’t know who to tell. So, she approaches one of the
elders at your church and reveals only that there’s “a problem” in her home.
She doesn’t share details but describes the problem as Mark being angry all
the time. She asks for the elder’s discretion in sharing anything with other
church leaders. The elder suggests they begin marriage counseling. In their
meetings, Jane ambiguously describes Mark’s behaviors with the children, but
she doesn’t call it “abuse.” Mark tells the elder he’s training the children and
leading the home like a godly husband and father. The elder warns Jane to be
cautious with the words she uses, reminding her that parents need to discipline
their children and won’t always do it perfectly.

Jane doesn’t know where to turn. She’s afraid for her children’s safety, but in
their counseling sessions the elder continually minimizes what is happening.
He seems to believe Mark’s version of the circumstances and calls Jane
“oversensitive,” so she hesitates to reveal further information or to use strong
language like “abuse.” In private, Mark accuses her of not living in reality.


                                      1162
                                 APPENDIX V



Three years pass, and Jane can no longer stomach how Mark disciplines the
children. The “counseling” failed long ago, so Jane takes the children and
leaves her husband and files a report against her husband for child abuse. The
elder who was previously involved tells you and child protection services that
Jane “never presented evidence of abuse.”

Brainstorming questions for help developing best practices:

    1. What structures and/or procedures should your church or ministry
        already have in place in case a situation like this occurs?
    2. What questions would have been helpful for discerning what was
        happening in the home?
    3. What might have been some red flags?
    4. How does the “reason to believe” standard help with this situation?
    5. Upon discovering the circumstances, what will you do first?
    6. What will you do next?
    7. Whom can you call for help navigating all the details?
    8. Who in your church is versed in child abuse and compassionate to care
        for the victim and/or family?
    9. What action steps will you take against the father?
    10. What will you tell the congregation and how?
    11. How will you determine if an outside agency will be helpful for this
        case?


SECTION SIX: THE MISUSE OF SPIRITUAL AUTHORITY

1. Summary Description of Misuse of Spiritual Authority

The reports of abusive spiritual leadership and/or moral failure by called and
ordained shepherds is increasing worldwide. Spiritual abuse and its effects are
egregiously demonstrated in the stories of Jim Jones and David Koresh but are
no less devastating to God’s name when performed by ministers of the PCA
or any other religious body.

Spiritual abuse may be manifested by any or all the following:

        ● Emotional or psychological manipulation based on Scripture,
        ● Physical and sexual assault,
        ● Financial exploitation,

                                     1163
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        ● Haughty, manipulative, demeaning, humiliating, accusatory,
          belittling, or shaming speech and/or behavior,
        ● Intimidation, coercion, and demand for conformity to non-biblical
          standards.

Spiritual abuse is an attempt to exert power and control over someone using
religion, faith, or beliefs. The Salvation Army includes “when spiritual
authority is misused to manipulate peoples’ emotional responses or loyalty for
the benefit of the church, institution, or of another individual.”213

Spiritual abuse aims to solidify the power, prestige, and gratification of the
abuser. The means are a misuse of Scripture and of the victim’s desire to please
God and their leader. Victims suffer shame, confusion, and spiritual doubt,
which have a negative impact on the victim’s perception of God’s character.
Congregations and the Body of Christ suffer morally and existentially beyond
the purely secular and legal definitions of abuse.

2. Expressing God’s Heart

In his first letter to Timothy (3:1-7) the apostle Paul provides a list of
qualifications for leaders in Christ’s church. Paul calls leadership a “noble
task.” Each character trait proceeds from a heart transformed by the gospel
through the power of the Holy Spirit. The picture Paul paints for Timothy is of
a leader motivated by the servanthood of Jesus Christ. Leaders are temperate,
self-controlled, respectable, gentle, and self-aware of their own failing. They
humbly struggle to pursue holiness and are motivated by love for Jesus Christ
and their neighbor. Leaders “preserve that authority which God had put upon
them.”214 They are not dominating, harsh, or uncaring. Leaders must express
the heart of God and bless those under their God-given authority. Their
leadership must truly seek the good of each member of the congregation and
community.

God is the perfect model of leadership; “I am the good shepherd. The good
shepherd lays down His life for the sheep” (John 10:11-18). Jesus’s washing



213
     “Spiritual Abuse,” Salvation Army New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa
Territory, approved December 2005, https://www.salvationarmy.org.nz/research-
policy/positional-statements/spiritual-abuse.
214
    The Westminster Confession of Faith as adopted by the Presbyterian Church in
America (Lawrenceville, GA: PCA CDM, 2007), Q. 129.
                                     1164
                                  APPENDIX V



of the disciples’ feet, even those of His betrayer, teaches us that to lead is to
bend down and serve those under our care. The disciples called Jesus
“Teacher” and “Lord,” and He confirmed those titles. Jesus had enormous, yet
restrained strength at His disposal. He laid down His heavenly privilege and,
instead, performed the duty of the lowest class in society. Jesus intentionally
served those He ruled. He is the opposite of an oppressive leader. The type of
leadership Christ intended for His kingdom involves abandoning all self-
serving motives and authoritarianism (described as “lording it over” in
Matthew 20) for the sake of God’s people.

Historically, however, many leaders have been self-serving, motivated by
power, authority, and material gain. When confronted, they shift blame.
Oppressive leaders wield power and are averse to sacrifice. They are unwilling
to relinquish the control that power brings and instead use it to build their own
kingdom. God casts the most severe judgment on this abusive type of
shepherd. When the Israelite leaders ruled harshly and brutally, Ezekiel told
them, “Woe to the shepherds of Israel who only take care of themselves!”
(Ezek. 34:2-10). He then asks the rhetorical question, “Should not shepherds
take care of the flock?” The prophet then says the Lord is against them, and
they will be held accountable.

3. Recognition of the Misuse of Spiritual Authority

Scripture provides many examples of abusive leadership. Abusive leaders fail
to apply the gospel to how they lead. In 1 Kings 12, we read of the foolishness
of Solomon’s son, Rehoboam.

        And the king answered the people harshly and forsaking the
        counsel that the old men had given him, he spoke to them
        according to the counsel of the young men, saying, “My father
        made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke. My father
        disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with
        scorpions” (1 Kings 12:13-14).

Rehoboam was authoritarian in his leadership and Israel paid greatly. In
Rehoboam’s foolishness, God’s people suffered a “split” in the kingdom.
Jeroboam led ten of the Israelite tribes away from the center of worship in
Jerusalem.

Micah condemns those “. . . who have authority, who abhor justice and make
crooked all that is right . . . who build with bloodshed and unrighteousness . .
                                      1165
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



. your leaders work for money . . . yet they say, ‘Is not the Lord among us?’”
(Mic. 3:9-11).

In addition,

           ● Eli was taken to task by the Lord for honoring his sons, who were
             false shepherds of God’s people, over Jehovah (1 Sam. 2:27-29).
           ● King Ahab was an idolater and “did more to provoke the Lord, the
             God of Israel, to anger than all the kings of Israel who were before
             him” (1 Kings 16:33).
           ● King Jehoram murdered his brothers when he ascended to the
             throne of Judah (2 Chron. 21:4-6).
           ● The Scribes and Pharisees bound “heavy burdens . . . on people’s
             shoulders but they themselves [were] not willing to move them
             with their finger. They [did] all their deeds to be seen by others”
             (Matt. 23:4-5).

The Lord repeatedly calls those who oppress to repentance (Judg. 6:9; 10:12;
1 Sam. 12:8; 2 Kings 13:4; Ps. 9:9; 10:18; 103:6; 146:7). At times, He even
consumes them in His wrath (Ezek. 22:29-31). Those who stand against
oppressive behavior and on the side of the oppressed reflect the Lord’s heart
for His people.

The Westminster Divines provided a fitting exhortation to those who would
seek their own selfish ends over the needs of their subordinates:

           Q.130. What are the sins of superiors?
           A. The sins of superiors are, besides the neglect of the duties
           required of them, and inordinate seeking of themselves, their
           own glory, ease, profit, or pleasure; commanding things
           unlawful, or not in the power of inferiors to perform;
           counseling, encouraging, or favoring them in that which is evil;
           dissuading, discouraging, or discountenancing them in that
           which is good; correcting them unduly; careless exposing, or
           leaving them to wrong, temptation, and danger; provoking
           them to wrath; or anyway dishonoring themselves, or lessening
           their authority, by an unjust, indiscreet, rigorous, or remiss
           behavior.215


   215
         The Westminster Larger and Shorter Catechism, Q. 130.
                                        1166
                                   APPENDIX V



There is a difference between lording over and serving the flock. “Driven
people think they own everything . . . called people, on the other hand, think
everything in life is on loan.”216 Godly leaders see authority as God-given for
His glory. Just as a father is commanded to care for his children and not
provoke them to wrath (Eph. 6:4), so a leader in the church must not dishonor
himself by provoking those under his care. Harsh, authoritarian, and abusive
leadership is roundly denounced by God and the Westminster Divines. It must
likewise be denounced by the modern church.

The Misuse of Spiritual Authority by an Organization

In April of 2018, the New York Times reported, “Bishops and other leaders of
the Roman Catholic Church in Pennsylvania covered up child sexual abuse by
more than 300 priests over a period of 70 years, persuading victims not to
report the abuse and law enforcement not to investigate it, according to a
searing report issued by a grand jury on Tuesday.”217
In February of 2019, the Houston Chronicle and the San Antonio Express-
News reported that, over the last twenty years, 380 Southern Baptist church
leaders were either convicted of sexual abuse, credibly accused and
successfully sued for abuse, or had confessed and resigned due to abuse.
Christianity Today noted that these church leaders left behind “more than 700
victims.”218

Baylor University completed a national “clergy sexual abuse” survey in
2015.219 While only evaluating the effectiveness of the church’s response to
predatory sexual sins of clergy, it is helpful to us in understanding the need for
better ministry regarding the misuse of spiritual authority. Both the impact of


   216
        James M. Kouzes and Barry Z. Posner, eds., Christian Reflections on the
Leadership Challenge (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2006), 104.
    217
        Laurie Goodstein and Sharon Otterman, “Catholic Priests Abused 1,000 Children
in Pennsylvania,” New York Times, August 8, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/14/us /catholic-church-sex-abuse-
pennsylvania.html.
    218
        David Roach, “SBC Recalls ‘Year of Waking Up’ Since Abuse
Investigation,” News & Reporting, Christianity Today, February 10, 2020,
https://www.christianitytoday.com/news/2020/february/sbc-waking-up-houston-
chronicle-abuse-investigation.html.
    219
        “Clergy Sexual Abuse Research,” Diana R. Garland School of Social Work,
Baylor University, accessed August 31, 2021,
https://socialwork.web.baylor.edu/research-impact/ongoing-research/clergy-sexual-
abuse-research.
                                        1167
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



the abuse and mishandling of reports by the church are a grave concern. The
results of the survey concluded:

         ● Only 4% of the perpetrators were prosecuted;
         ● Only 8% Agreed or Strongly Agreed that their church supported
             them after the abuse occurred;
         ●   Only 8% Agreed or Strongly Agreed that the perpetrator
             apologized to them;
         ●   50% Agreed or Strongly Agreed that their experience with the
             church after the abuse negatively affected their relationship with
             God;
         ●   80% Agreed or Strongly Agreed that their experience with the
             church after the abuse negatively affected their spiritual life;
         ●   Only 9% Agreed or Strongly Agreed the church was helpful when
             they reported the abuse;
         ●   Only 15% Agreed or Strongly Agreed that their
             church/denomination thoroughly investigated the report;
         ●   Only 11% Agreed or Strongly Agreed that their church openly
             communicated with them during the investigation.

Abuse occurs in a favorable environment. This is sometimes referred to as
“institutional,” “organizational,” or “systemic”220 abuse, and can be defined as
“A system, such as a family, a government entity, a school, a church or
religious organization, a political group, or a social service organization,
[which] enables the abuse of the people it purports to protect.”221

The primary leader of an abusive organization may be charismatic, charming,
and/or particularly gifted at preaching. This type of leader draws others in and
drives the system. People are attracted by magnetic personalities and may
voluntarily or even involuntarily become participants in authoritarian and/or
abusive leadership. Followers may be driven by the vision of the leader and
will protect his position for the church and/or organization and for their own
sense of power in the system.




   220
        “System” comes from Greek words meaning “to stand” and “together.” When
standing together to oppress those under their care, church leaders are systemic in
their abuse.
    221
        Diane Langberg, Redeeming Power: Understanding Authority and Abuse in the
Church (Grand Rapids, MI: Brazos, 2020), 75.
                                       1168
                                 APPENDIX V



Non-abusive leaders and/or members may also become complicit in the misuse
of spiritual authority if they turn away claims or ignore the occurrence. They
may protect the leader because they have not themselves experienced the abuse
others have. Complicity likewise occurs when people believe that truthfulness
damages Christ’s name or the reputation of his church. When leaders practice
oppressive behaviors, those who experience the abuse or receive a report have
a responsibility to seek healing and justice. Christ’s name and reputation are
glorified when the church stands against those who damage others.

Signs of the Misuse of Spiritual Authority

Mary Demuth lists ten signs of a spiritual abuser in ministry.222 These include
but are not limited to the following.

        ● Distorted view of respect: A spiritually abusive leader forgets
            respect is earned, not granted, and demands it without humble
            servanthood.
        ●   Demands personal allegiance as proof of allegiance to Christ:
            For a spiritually abusive leader, the only acceptable path for
            followers is obedience. Absolute submission to the leader gives
            evidence that the follower is “Christ-like.”
        ●   “Exclusivity” language: A spiritually abusive leader’s way is the
            right and true way; everyone else is wrong or misguided.
        ●   A culture of fear and shame: The culture a spiritually abusive
            leader creates silences critics, searches out failure in others, and
            humiliates people into compliance.
        ●   Personality cult: A spiritually abusive leader encourages a cult
            of personality consisting of “yes people” isolated from the needs
            of others in the congregation. Often, a charismatic leader will slip
            into arrogance, defensiveness, and pride.
        ●   Dependence: A spiritually abusive leader will promote himself or
            a small group of devoted followers for spiritual information.
            Personal and independent discipleship in this atmosphere is
            discouraged.



     222
         Mary DeMuth, “10 Ways to Spot Spiritual Abuse,” Mary DeMuth (blog),
September 6, 2016, https://www.marydemuth.com/spiritual-abuse-10-ways-to-spot-
it/.


                                     1169
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        ● Demand blind servitude of followers but live privileged lives:
          A spiritually abusive leader takes the first seat and justifies his
          material extravagance as God’s favor and blessing on his ministry.
        ● Buffered from criticism: A spiritually abusive leader does this
          surrounding himself with only those who commit to absolute
          allegiance. Those with legitimate concerns are considered
          enemies, banished, or battered into submission, and/or crushed.
        ● Outward performance over authentic spirituality: A
          spiritually abusive leader often demands strict behavior and
          adherence to rules from congregants, but practices licentiousness,
          greed, and uncontrolled addictions behind closed doors.
        ● Unswerving allegiance from the inner circle: Fear of a
          spiritually abusive leader prevents anyone from confronting with
          their concerns.

These are additional characteristics of systemic misuse of spiritual authority.

        ● Pharisaical teaching: The church tends to be “pharisaical” in
            their application of biblical teaching. More emphasis is placed on
            personal piety than on the gospel of Christ’s saving work.
        ●   Public prestige and undue influence: The leadership of the
            church has significant public prestige and has undue influence on
            their membership. Members have great difficulty disagreeing with
            their leaders due to the power of spiritual authority they exhibit.
        ●   Pious image: Much is made in the church of keeping up an image
            of piety among members and the church as an organization. The
            leadership may hide behind passages such as Matthew 18 when
            members complain openly about the leadership. The leadership
            may demand Non-Disclosure Agreements (NDAs) from those
            who leave the employ of the church. Each may be an attempt to
            maintain a pious image.
        ●   Denial and damage control: When responding to criticism, they
            emphasize denial and damage control. Their first response to
            criticism is that leadership in the church would “never do such a
            thing.” The leadership tends to first look for ways to lessen the
            impact on attendance, giving, and reputation. They may look for
            “scapegoats” to shift the responsibility of leadership failure.
        ●   Willfully unresponsive: Humility is lacking. There appears to be
            little willingness to hear criticism. Therefore, the church fails to
            change.

                                     1170
                                  APPENDIX V



An organizational misuse of spiritual authority is particularly difficult for
victims to identify and seek to rectify. Abuse typically involves more than one
leader, so there may be little support to confront the abusive leadership.
Because the organization (group) has exhibited the above abusive attitudes and
actions, and any disagreement is seen as disloyal or rebellious, it is problematic
for the victim to find others who can confirm abuse is taking place.

4. Responding to Reports of the Misuse of Spiritual Authority

The unfortunate response of many institutions and churches has been to ignore
or cover up abuse. For a victim, this feels as if they have been betrayed twice.
Often the second betrayal is worse than the first. It results in shame and
ostracism, with further emotional, spiritual, and physical harm. Those who
suffer under abusive leadership may struggle in their relationship with both the
church and with God. Many “deconstruct.” When abuse occurs, churches and
institutions must have established processes for comforting and restoring
victims.

Victims

Abuse by a “man of God” is confusing, which creates significant difficulty for
reporting. Spiritual abuse causes one to doubt their own perceptions. Victims
may be paralyzed as they struggle with how to respond. The problem is further
exacerbated as details might not materialize all at once. The consistent
questioning of reality by a victim may result in convincing oneself the abuse
did not occur. Also, it’s not uncommon for a victim to rationalize the abuser’s
behavior. Victims will say they gave the abuser the “full benefit of doubt” and
chose to respond to the circumstances with “charitable judgment.” In the most
twisted scenario, victims may even question whether God ordained the
leader’s behavior.

At times, seemingly small blemishes are the first sign of a much deeper
problem. These flaws in the fabric of an institution become toxic over time.
Therefore, both egregious failings and mundane concerns must be reported.

Lack of a recognizable, trustworthy source for reporting leads to inertia, and
further compounds damage to the flock. Delayed reporting impedes the
following:

          ● Confrontation of the abusive leader,
          ● Cessation of abuse,
                                      1171
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        ● Repair, and/or
        ● Reconciliation.

In the absence of a means for reporting, the victim and/or family may make
the mistake of questioning the abuser directly without adequate preparation
and/or protection. Because of the power and status of the abuser relative to the
victim, it is rare that a “brother to brother” appeal (as described in Matthew
18:15-19) will result in resolution or repentance. There is also significant risk
of causing further consternation and damage to the victim. (See Matthew 7
discussion below under “Shepherding the Abusive Leader.”)

The high incidence of abuse of all forms requires a clearly identified,
empathetic, formally established, well-trained, and user-friendly means of
reporting. When a report is made, the following should be kept in mind.

        ● Confidentiality: Assure the victim their story is safe, and you will
            only share what they allow. Encourage them to share as much as
            they are comfortable sharing, keeping in mind the victim may not
            want to say everything.
        ●   Put the victim at ease: The victim may not trust you completely.
            If you are a leader in the institution, the victim may naturally
            question if you may be abusive or complicit. Affirm you will care
            for them above the institution.
        ●   Listen attentively: Try not to interrupt, carefully discern when to
            ask for more detail.
        ●   Resist critiquing. Often those who hear stories of abuse criticize
            how the story is told. This confuses victims. Allow them to share
            however they choose.
        ●   Believe the story: There will be time to sort out the veracity of
            the victims’ claims. In the beginning it is important to give them
            a trusted place to share. It is important to sit with the ambiguities
            and resist asking questions about the victim’s credibility and
            motivations.
        ●   Be patient: If the abuse has been sexual in nature, the victim may
            be particularly hesitant to share the full story.
        ●   Write down as many direct quotes as possible: It is important
            to have an accurate account of the report in order to pass along
            information to those who will bring accountability to the accused.
        ●   Be supportive, compassionate, and affirm the victim’s bravery
            in reporting: Assure the victim this was not their fault. The

                                      1172
                                   APPENDIX V



           responsibility of abusive behavior is always the abuser’s. Ensure
           you will do what you can to help.
         ● Give the victim as much information as you can about next
           steps: Give the victim options. Let them know that you will do
           your best to support and protect them and that you are going to
           talk to people who can help.
         ● Follow up. Let the victim know what steps have been taken or
           will be taken. This is a very vulnerable time and position, so it is
           important that they are fully informed.
         ● Know your limits. If you have limited training in abuse, humbly
           seek expertise. Though you may be well-meaning, be careful to
           only do what is legal and what provides safety to the victim.

Abuser

Some of the most charming and likeable leaders are also the most adept at
hiding evil behavior. Lawyer and psychologist, Dr. Wendy L. Patrick, wrote,
“Having spent over two decades prosecuting cases of domestic abuse, I've seen
that perpetrators can fly under the radar for years because they are able to
disarm with charm—clothing themselves with (misplaced) trustworthiness and
credibility.”223

Abusive leaders deny accusations, especially in response to people perceived
as weak. This is particularly prevalent in any private conversations with the
victim. Solo confrontation of the abuser by the victim is likely to result in one
or more of the following:

         ●   Gaslighting,
         ●   Verbal attack,
         ●   Threat, and/or
         ●   Blaming the victim.

An abuser will typically try to silence the victim by . . .

         ● Appealing to the cause of Christ,

   223
        Wendy L. Patrick, “Behind the Façade: The Socially Charming Domestic
Abuser” Why Bad Looks Good (blog), Psychology Today, April 12, 2018,
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/why-bad-looks-good/201804/behind-the-
fa-ade-the-socially-charming-domestic-abuser.
                                       1173
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        ●   Appealing to the sanctity and harmony of the church,
        ●   Appealing to the abuser’s authority,
        ●   Appealing to biblical exegesis,
        ●   The deployment of friends or other means at his disposal, and/or
        ●   Evoking a non-disclosure agreement and threaten attached
            penalties.

Without confrontation, abuse continues and escalates. Ending abuse requires
challenge by a greater or independent authority. Evidence of this is found in 2
Samuel 12 as Nathan confronts King David. David would not have repented
without Nathan’s confrontation. Confrontation must be biblical and loving,
however powerful enough to produce true repentance. Such greater power
comes only from the Holy Spirit.

5. Reporting

Reporting the misuse of spiritual authority depends on the type of abuse
committed by a leader in the church.

Be familiar with the reporting requirements in your state. Typically, these laws
are less stringent for adult abuse than they are for child abuse. It is
recommended the following be appointed to respond to the survivor and
accused:

        1. Church Advocacy Group and
        2. Session Crisis Intervention Team

Church Advocacy Group

Those who have experienced any form of abuse and/or assault should have an
easily accessible, empathetic, reliable, and formal means of reporting. Persons
with like experience or situation help somewhat in decreasing fear of reporting.
Appointed and highly visible advocates in the local church might include a
small group of well-trained members.

The advocacy group should document the concern or complaint in sufficient
detail to categorize it as reportable to public authorities (such as physical
abuse, rape, sexual assault, physical assault, battery, kidnapping, etc.) or non-
reportable (spiritual, verbal, emotional, financial abuse short of the above,
doctrinal error, abusive leadership, sexual harassment, adultery, deceit, etc.).

                                      1174
                                 APPENDIX V



Crisis Intervention Team

The Crisis Intervention Team should consist of effective, wise, and disciplined
elders (other than those assigned to advocacy group) able to intervene
promptly, efficiently, and effectively to the complaint.

Major tasks will be to . . .

        1. Investigate the matter,
        2. Relieve any allegedly abusive leaders from duty (after confirmed
           disclosure, family safety, and abused must set the pace), and
        3. Provide shepherding counsel and support to victims, abusers, and
           their families.

The Crisis Intervention Team is also responsible as a liaison with Presbytery
and communication to and with the congregation and general public regarding
the matter. Truth, honesty, and accountability should be the hallmarks of the
team’s interactions with the accused, congregation, Presbytery, and with the
public.

The Crisis Intervention Team (or appointed elder) should inform the accused
leader of the charge and relieve him from duty immediately (after confirmed
disclosure, family safety, and the abused must set the pace). They should
conduct their investigation in such a way as to carefully shepherd the victim
and preserve their safety (see “Redemptive Shepherding” below), anonymity,
privacy, and welfare.

Reportable complaints should be given to police. The Advocacy Group and/or
Crisis Intervention Team should inform the pastor and/or Session (the latter
only if the pastor is implicated) immediately after submission to authorities
and give them their written report. This is to avoid cover up for serious crimes
and offenses at the beginning, the most crucial phase of the process.

Non-reportable complaints should be written in sufficient detail and presented
to the Session. It is wise to shield a victim’s identity unless given permission
to disclose. If the complaint is warranted, the Session might plan a strategy to
confront the accused. A complaint considered unwarranted should be
documented and provided to the accuser with the reasons for the
determination.



                                     1175
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should meet with the accused after the complaint is lodged, as soon as possible
if reported to authorities. Prior to this meeting, they should engage in prayer
for wisdom, discernment, and the preservation of the honor of Christ and His
church, as well as for grace in approach to both parties.

A written complaint should be presented to the accused leader. The accused’s
response will be documented verbatim by the advocates, including the
responses to appropriate further clarifying questions. Such questions should
provide details of . . .

        •   Factual occurrence,
        •   Motives,
        •   Emotions,
        •   Prior events pertinent to the investigation as seen fit by the
            investigators and accused,
        •   Specific disagreement,
        •   Regret,
        •   Remorse, or
        •   Repentance expressed by the accused.

Each answer should be recorded in as much detail as possible, using direct
quotes rather than paraphrases. These questions and statements should be
recorded and documented until the meeting has reached a conclusion.
Questions refused should also be so recorded.
The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should meet following a confrontation for prayer and to deliberate upon,
analyze, and formulate their findings and conclusion of the preliminary
investigation. They should document their findings and recommendations for
further pursuit of the complaint in writing and submit them to the accused. At
the presentation to the accused, the team should record any rebuttal,
clarification, or other response of the accused.

The Advocacy Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder
should prayerfully deliberate on the written complaint, response, and rebuttal,
and amend or sustain the original findings and recommendation in a final
report. This report should be given to both accuser and accused. The following
are possible courses of action that may be recommended to the Session.



                                     1176
                                 APPENDIX V



        1. The issue is to be resolved with follow-up by the Advocacy
           Group and Crisis Intervention Team or representative elder to both
           parties separately.
        2. The issue requires further investigation by Session and/or
           outside investigators or counsel before actions can be
           recommended.
        3. The abuse report requires immediate action such as contacting
           the police or Presbytery if not already reported, suspension from
           duty, or medical/psychiatric intervention.
        4. Action requires a formal program of biblical counseling,
           spiritual discipline, mentoring, and accountability of progress in
           conformity to Christ by one or both parties.
        5. Formal charges or dissolution of pastoral relationship is
           warranted.

Bringing Charges Against a Teaching Elder

Besides prayer, confrontation, deliberation, and investigation, it is important
that PCA churches avail themselves of the formal system for accountability if
a teaching elder is exhibiting signs of abuse and refusing to repent.

The PCA Book of Church Order (BCO) Chapter 34 is titled “Special Rules
Pertaining to Process Against a Minister.” A church minister (teaching elder)
is a “member” of a Presbytery, not the local church. Therefore, when his sin is
repetitive following the attempt of members to confront him, it is necessary to
pursue accountability through members of the Presbytery (34-4).

There are three possible ways to proceed by the Session or church members:

        1. Discuss the matter with another elder in the Presbytery, of which
           the teaching elder is a member, seeking their personal aid in
           further confrontation;
        2. Bring clear, documented proof of unrepentant leadership failure
           to the committee that handles charges brought against member
           pastors for their consultation;
        3. Bring charges against the minister before this committee. Two
           witnesses must bring testimony (BCO 34-5) or there must be clear
           “corroborative evidence.”

Although the first and second options may be less intimidating to church
members, bringing an abusive leader to trial may be necessary to provide
                                     1177
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



safety to the greater church. A teaching elder who has been found unrepentant
will be publicly disallowed from ministry in the PCA as long as evidence of
unrepentance remains.

However, it must be understood that leadership failure that does not involve
“heretical” teaching must clearly evidence damage to Christ’s church.

        Heresy and schism may be of such a nature as to warrant
        deposition; but errors ought to be carefully considered,
        whether they strike at the vitals of religion and are
        industriously spread, or whether they arise from the weakness
        of the human understanding and are not likely to do much
        injury (BCO 34-5).

Should the congregation wish to remove a teaching elder due to his spiritual
abuse, they are required to follow these steps.

        1. “. . . there shall always be a meeting of the congregation called
           and conducted in the same manner as the call of the Pastor” (BCO
           23-1).
        2. The meeting must be presided over by a ruling or teaching elder
           of the PCA.
        3. The will of the congregation (as voted upon) is presented to the
           Presbytery for approval for the “dissolution of the pastoral
           relation.”

Independent Investigation and Outside Counsel

After the Session has received the preliminary investigation report of the
Advocacy Group/
elder, they may wish to investigate further or engage expert outside counsel.
Outside independent counsel should be sought for potential felony, sexual
harassment complaints, serious breach of biblical doctrine, evidence of toxic
leadership, or any complaint that was reported to police or public agencies.
Examples of such outside counsel include legal, certified public accountants,
trained counselors, trained advocates, psychological and/or medical personnel,
and/or seminary faculty with expertise in the field.

Urgency of outside assistance is warranted if the victim exhibits these signs:

        ● Agitation,
                                     1178
                                  APPENDIX V



        ● Depression, and
        ● Suicidality.

Or if the following are true:

        ●   Victim has insufficient resources available;
        ●   There is complexity to the complaint;
        ●   The complaint is extensive;
        ●   There is great potential for harm if mishandled.

The safety of the victim(s), responsibility of the church, and the accountability
of a guilty leader are foremost in the work of an independent counsel. The
church’s image does not take precedence over truthfulness and repentance.

6. Redemptive Shepherding

Shepherding the Victim

The consequences of abusive leadership are significant for a congregation and
will require intensive grace and repair by the Holy Spirit. Sessions are called
to shepherd the flock by lovingly and effectively bringing God’s comfort and
restoration to redeem the horrendous sin of the misuse of spiritual authority.
Ministering to the victim of abusive leadership is intended to provide
opportunity for healing physically, emotionally, and spiritually.

Ministry to the victim involves the following:

        ● A safe place and person (people) with whom to share their story,
        ● Counseling with a counselor trained in spiritual abuse and trauma,
        ● Any medical care necessary (physical or mental),
        ● Spiritual counsel that affirms the victim’s experience and patient
          and gracious teaching on Jesus’s steadfast love for His child,
        ● Help in bringing accountability to those who have misused their
          spiritual authority.

This shepherding care should be assigned to well-trained elders and
counselors. These caregivers should be capable of demonstrating God’s grace
in order to improve and heal the traumas specific to the victim(s). Victims have
different needs, and to effectively minister, elders and counselors must
understand these complexities.

                                      1179
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Redemptive shepherding will be costly in time, effort, and tears. Shepherding
care must be sustained until significant healing has been accomplished.
Shepherding should occur as quickly as possible and be assigned to skilled
counselors.

Shepherding the Abusive Leader

Matthew 18 speaks of brother-to-brother exhortation, implying confrontation
of leaders from a similar position of rank. A church must make every attempt
to obtain the sinful leader’s repentance through direct and individual
confrontation (BCO 34-3). Jesus teaches this process in Matthew 18:15-20. It
is a step-by-step means of graciously turning a sinner from his sin. Each step
in Jesus’s instructions provides a “raising of the stakes” as more people,
including those with greater authority, are consulted and involved in the
confrontation.

Scripture also provides direction in cases where a subordinate confronting one
in authority may be treacherous. “Do not give dogs what is holy, and do not
throw your pearls before pigs, lest they trample them underfoot and turn to
attack you (Matt. 7:6).” Throwing the pearls of the truth before abusers may
result in further harm to the victim (Prov. 23:9; 26:4). In a case where the
oppressor is in authority over the victim and has a history of unrepentance
when confronted, he may be considered dangerous. Confrontation can
negatively impact the life of the victim(s) causing further emotional or spiritual
trauma. Jesus provides freedom for an accuser to liberate themselves from
greater harm by confronting their abuser. Those who have God-given
leadership authority must take responsibility for bringing Christ’s authority to
bear on an errant leader. This provides safety for the victim(s), vindication for
those who support them, and accountability for the offender.

Jesus calls those who have been sinned against to confront an offending
brother with an attitude of humility. The one who challenges a brother in his
sin should humbly prepare himself first by recognizing his own sin. He must
take care to remember Jesus suffered on behalf of both his sin and that of the
offender’s.

The following are difficulties in bringing accountability to leaders who
perpetrate abuse.

        ● Hesitancy to Report. Victims are aware they may not be
            believed, even though an overwhelming number of reports are
                                      1180
                                  APPENDIX V



          accurate and true. Reporting is often a great risk for the victim;
          therefore, many do not come forward.
        ● Aggressive Defensiveness: The abuser, typically a superior in a
          better, socially integrated position in the institution or
          organization, becomes aggressively defensive. DARVO
          articulates three known tactics of this type of defense,
               o Deny the abuse ever took place,
               o Attack the victim for attempting to hold the abuser
                   accountable, and
               o Claim they are the real victim, thus Reverse Victim and
                   Offender.

This is considered a specific form of gaslighting and is usually accompanied
by emotional, physical, and/or legal threats against the victim. It creates a very
difficult situation for victim- to-abuser confrontation.

Those who are accused of misusing their spiritual authority should be
immediately removed from positions of authority while an investigation takes
place in order to protect the congregation from possible further harm.

Finally, those who are found after investigation to have misused their spiritual
authority should be encouraged to seek skilled counseling in abuse. Every
effort should be made to bring the offender to repentance and healing.

Mishandling Reports

Mishandling of spiritual abuse by a church and/or Presbytery produces very
serious repercussions for the victims, for the congregation, and for the honor
of God’s name. The emotional, physical, and spiritual harm done to victims of
abusive authority is further compounded when those charged with caring for
God’s people fail to respond adequately to their cries for help.

Mishandling may occur through failure at multiple levels.

        ● Friends: When sharing their experiences, a victim may seek
            counsel from friends. These friends may not believe the victim
            and fail to provide empathetic care. In addition, they may gossip
            and cause greater shame. Friends may also pass information on to
            others, including the abusive leader, who will then cause further
            harm to the victim. Abusive leaders will do anything to protect
            themselves from unwanted scrutiny.
                                      1181
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        ● Leaders: Much like friends, leaders may fail to listen well and
             take steps to rectify the abuse. If the goal is to protect leadership
             or a church’s image, leaders may fail to both provide a safe place
             for the reporting of the abuse and accountability for the one
             misusing their spiritual authority. They may try to cover up the
             abuse. Other leaders may also pressure the victim to forgive and
             forget. Finally, they may also pass the information on to the
             abusive leader creating greater danger for the victim.

Unfortunately, it is more common for a church to create further damage to the
victim’s spiritual and emotional health through the mishandling of reporting
than it is to be a safe place to find justice and healing. Church split or splinters
are more likely to occur when church leaders fail to hold abusers accountable.

7. Prevention of the Misuse of Spiritual Authority

Institutions have ethical and legal obligations to lessen the risk of abuse and
safeguard members by implementing . . .

        ●    Appropriate policies,
        ●    Reoccurring education,
        ●    Careful hiring practices,
        ●    Safe methods for reporting concerns,
        ●    Prompt unbiased preliminary investigations,
        ●    Referral to expert forensic investigator practices,
        ●    Pastoral and psychological support,
        ●    Procedure for submission to legal authorities, and
        ●    Procedure for removal of suspected perpetrators from the
             possibility of further harm.

As a denomination, the PCA is committed to scriptural authority and trained,
godly leadership. What do we look for in church leaders? Whereas every
leader bears the sin of Adam, the shepherding of God’s people requires maturity
in the progression of sanctification (Titus 1:5-9, BCO 8-2). God has revealed in
Scripture the standards for leadership as well as instruction in what it means
to be a leader of God’s people.

In the Book of Church Order (21-5) a candidate for ordination is asked eight
questions, two of which are:


                                       1182
                                  APPENDIX V



        6. Do you promise to be zealous and faithful in maintaining
           the truths of the gospel and the purity and peace and unity
           of the Church, whatever persecution or opposition may
           arise unto you on that account?
        7. Do you engage to be faithful and diligent in the exercise of
           all your duties as a Christian and a minister of the gospel,
           whether personal or relational, private or public; and to
           endeavor by the grace of God to adorn the profession of
           the gospel in your manner of life, and to walk with
           exemplary piety before the flock of which God shall make
           you overseer?

A minister of the gospel in the PCA is expected to strive for purity of doctrine
and the unity and peace of his congregation. He is to “adorn the profession of
the gospel” in his relationships and teaching. Timothy Witmer writes, “In
leading the flock, shepherds must be motivated by love for the Lord and for
the well-being of the sheep. It must be evident to the congregation that the
leadership of the elders is exercised for the good of the people and not for the
benefit of the leaders.”224

Leaders who practice domestic and sexual violence believe they are “entitled.”
Leaders who abuse their place of leadership likewise believe they are entitled
to their position of authority and control of the congregation. Leaders who
neglect to recognize that their authority is from Jesus Christ and under His
ultimate authority fail to lead in Christ-honoring ways.

The Ordination Process

Candidates for the gospel ministry and others employed for spiritual oversight
(Sunday school teachers, youth leaders, etc.) should be examined carefully to
determine their godly character. Presbyteries and Sessions are encouraged to
carefully investigate a candidate for leadership roles including, but not limited
to, the candidate’s knowledge of theology. Background checks, social media
checks, and careful reference checks should be used to screen for abusive
leadership.

As men apply to come under care by Presbyteries, it is imperative these steps
be taken to confirm the calling of a man to the gospel ministry.


   224
       Timothy Z. Witmer, Shepherd Leader (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing,
2010), 156, Kindle.
                                      1183
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




        1. The recommending Session must carefully evaluate the
           applicant’s family, finances, and leadership philosophy and skills
           before recommending him to come under care of the Presbytery.
        2. The Presbytery committee responsible for taking a man “under
           care” should confirm, through interviews of the applicant and his
           wife (if applicable), application, and recommendation forms, that
           the man satisfies the requirements found in Titus 1:5-9 and 1
           Timothy 3:1-7.

Careful attention should be given to how the applicant performed in past and
present positions of leadership in the workplace and home. Questions should
be asked to determine the following:

        ● Candidate’s interactions with his wife,
        ● Candidate’s interactions with and discipline of his children,
        ● The candidate’s work in team settings,
        ● The candidate’s leadership philosophy in the workplace or other
          settings where he has authority over others,
        ● The candidate’s willingness to acknowledge wrongdoing and
          repent,
        ● The candidate’s childhood and spiritual development: Persons
          with significant childhood adversity, including abuse or neglect,
          or excessively privileged upbringing have much higher risk of
          being abusive.

Pastoral Ministry

Once employed, many in spiritual leadership lack consistent mentorship,
accountability, and external discipleship. In the rush of daily ministry and
stress of crisis intervention, it is easy to neglect prayer, Bible meditation, and
re-creation in the Lord and His people. A formal accountability program and
mentor should be established at the Presbytery level for each leader in
ministry. This mentor will assist in recognizing early deviations from God’s
instructions for His leaders in the church.

Finally, success and power, especially in the world’s eyes, can easily corrupt.
These were the temptations offered to Christ in the desert by Satan. Should
success and power be given, it must be used judiciously only for God’s glory,
not one’s own.

                                      1184
                                 APPENDIX V



8. Case Studies

Jacob

Jacob was still in college when he and his wife joined a new PCA church plant
in their town. It was in an affluent area with many wealthy families. These
families were the backbone of this small, dedicated congregation. The pastor
was an excellent speaker, effective in ministering to the members from the
pulpit. He was the founding pastor of the church plant that was administered
by elders. Within six short months, Jacob and the pastor formed a close bond.
His pastor asked Jacob to join the staff in an administrative position and to
serve as a ruling elder on the Session.

In time, Jacob began to observe that his pastor was overly focused on gathering
people to hear him preach. Jacob said it felt like his pastor had an unhealthy
infatuation with the praise and applause of his followers. Jacob believed the
purpose of church leadership was to model Christlikeness and train the “saints”
for the works of ministry, not simply to gather them to hear one uniquely gifted
teacher. Jacob brought the issue to his pastor in the most non-judgmental way
he could. Because of his childhood abuse experience, Jacob was also
particularly sensitive to “being wrong.” This insecurity made him make sure
to take the log out of his own eye before confronting anyone in their sin.

Jacob was unprepared for the response. The pastor immediately shifted the
blame to Jacob. He walked away from that confrontation with the nagging
feeling his pastor was sinfully proud. He noticed that when a young, recently
married couple began to have serious marital conflict and asked for an
appointment with the pastor, the pastor scheduled them two weeks out.
However, when a wealthy, attractive woman, the good friend of an influential
pastor in the PCA, asked for an appointment to discuss the pastor’s teaching,
she was immediately given a hearing at her home.

The pastor’s self-centeredness also became apparent in his handling of the
church’s money. He hired a personal assistant, gave himself a significant raise,
and signed himself up for a medical plan without Session approval. When the
church purchased office space, the pastor spent a large sum on the
remodeling—again, without Session approval.




                                     1185
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Jim

Jim, a former college ministry leader, was a dynamic individual who most
folks thought of as a people-magnet. Daniel was recruited by Jim, his former
college leader, to work for him as an assistant with his church-planting work.
Jim, as the church planting pastor, gave Daniel extensive duties, all which
Daniel considered helpful for his growth as a young pastor. However, as Jim
laid task after task at Daniel’s feet, he would not help him prioritize. So, Daniel
carefully considered the needs and prioritized the duties himself.

One Sunday morning, Daniel and Jim had a disagreement over the observance
of the Lord’s Supper, and Jim put Daniel on suspension. The intent was to have
the Session discuss his case a week later. Daniel’s church had mostly borrowed
elders, friends of Jim, who did not live locally but out of state. As Jim’s friends,
the Session did his bidding and did not provide the type of oversight a Session
is called to perform.

Jim did not seek to understand Daniel, nor did he provide an opportunity to
discuss any options that might help them both move forward. Daniel said Jim
displayed a shocking change of attitude that took him by surprise. Although
Daniel was reinstated the next week, he and his wife felt they were walking on
eggshells.

Some months later Daniel was told he needed to maintain a chart of 30-minute
increments and record all he did both personally and at work. He was also
instructed to report with whom he met during the day. The men in charge of
Daniel’s oversight were tasked with discussing the reports with Jim.

Eventually, the elders voted to dissolve Daniel’s call to the church and ask for
his resignation. It was explained to Daniel that if he chose to go to the
Presbytery to challenge the decision, he would give up his severance package
as a conditional response to a previously signed non-disclosure agreement.

During several months of transition Daniel was given strict instructions not to
meet with certain individuals at the church, and he was required to tell Jim
what was said if he did meet with anyone. Daniel said, “If I did talk with people
at all, my narrative was to be that ‘I fired myself’ by my actions . . . that I was
the only party that acted wrongly. One of Jim’s friends on the Session
continued to call and threaten Daniel.



                                       1186
                                APPENDIX V



Since Daniel’s departure, the church has particularized. The Session continues
to witness conflicts between Jim, his assistants, and members of the
congregation.


Mark

Mark, a church planter in the PCA, lived and ministered in a major U.S. city
and, over the course of several years, successfully established a thriving
church. Mark and his wife were hospitable, regularly welcomed a variety of
people into their home, and eagerly shared the love of Christ. Mark had a
charismatic personality and extensive business experience. As the church grew
and organized, a group of men surrounded him, becoming part of the early
leadership structure. These men were fiercely loyal to their pastor and valued
his insight and direction.

Mark’s marriage, however, was deeply broken. This came to the attention of
those closest to him, so they enfolded the couple in an effort to help. What
became obvious to these men throughout the process, however, was Mark’s
severe ill-treatment of his wife and patterns of abusive behavior. The team
graciously entered into the situation and provided a safe place for Mark and
his wife to get counsel and pursue restoration. But what should have been a
path toward repentance, forgiveness, and healing instead became a battle for
control.

Mark responded to his leaders’ efforts by discrediting each one of them,
questioning their motives and actions. Mark’s unrelenting accusations and
criticisms wore them down. In the end, two of the four leaders moved on to
other churches. One particularly discouraged leader left the PCA altogether.

The pastor’s abusive behavior continued to wreak havoc on his marriage and
in the church. When they particularized, the Session of the church, similar to
the early leadership team, witnessed the brokenness of Mark’s marriage. Like
the leadership team, they pursued him in order to encourage his marriage
relationship.

Again, Mark rejected his fellow leaders. This time, the Presbytery was asked
by the Session to step in and help. After countless hours of counsel and
investigation with little response from Mark, the Presbytery Committee
recommended his removal. Rather than respond humbly, receiving the loving


                                    1187
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



counsel of his brothers, Mark wrote a scathing letter to the Presbytery and
asked that they remove his name from the rolls.

As one of the original leadership team members confessed, it was difficult to
pursue what appeared to be the censure of a leader when that leader was
manipulative and had great relational capital in the church. However, Mark’s
response to their confrontation should have raised red flags immediately, and
accountability should have been achieved by the Presbytery.

Ethan

Ethan was hired as an assistant pastor in a medium-sized PCA church. He and
his wife, Amelia, enjoyed and were challenged by the grace-filled messages
the pastor preached. Having left his former pastorate under a cloud of
suspicion, Pastor Fredrick told the search committee and his new congregation
when he was interviewed that he was the "victim" of the elders of the church
he had served prior to coming. They “felt bad for the guy.” The pastor
mentioned Ethan as a reason he wanted to serve in that particular church. Ethan
was encouraged by the ego-gratifying comments.

Soon after moving into his new office at the church, Fredrick put black paper
over his office window. A few staff members thought it odd, but no action was
recommended. Despite the nagging feeling Ethan had about Fredrick’s strange
behaviors, he worked hard to get along with his pastor. He remembered
Fredrick saying that the assistant pastor in his previous church “hacked” him.
Ethan did not want to be like Fredrick’s former assistant: suspicious or
distrusting. He believed Christians are called to grace, so he was determined
to show Fredrick the grace the pastor did not receive in his previous church
situation.

It was within a year of being installed that pornographic videos from Netflix
showed up in the church mail. A couple years later, several of Fredrick’s
hidden moral failures also became apparent. It turned out he was plagiarizing
his sermons and Bible studies. However, in response, Fredrick preached that
love gives the benefit of the doubt. So, the congregation chose to overlook the
offenses.

It is difficult for Christians to accept that a leader in the church can be so evil
as to lie and manipulate with little or no sign of remorse. It is common for a
congregation to stand behind the leader. During his years of ministry, it
became clear that Fredrick’s leadership was deeply flawed. The way he led the
                                       1188
                                  APPENDIX V



church did not reflect a servant and sacrificial leadership that God’s shepherds
are called to. The elders became convinced that it was important for the witness
of Christ to stand at the center of their church leadership and that they, as the
gatekeepers, must hold their leader accountable. The Session asked for
Fredrick’s resignation and the Presbytery voted to depose him from ministry.

There were many attempts by the congregation and Presbytery to shepherd and
help Fredrick. Rather than submit to their oversight and authority, he resigned.
He went on to start another church in a different denomination. Looking back,
Ethan said there were several red flags he should have seen. To this day, he
lives with the guilt that he failed his congregation by not identifying the
abusive leadership sooner and taking the steps necessary to bring him to
accountability.

Brainstorming questions for help developing best practices:

    1. What are some “red flags” in each of these stories that warrant further
       investigation?
    2. What structures might have helped eliminate any of these
       mistreatments?
    3 How would you respond to a report of a leader who misuses his power
       or authority?
    4. What systems do you have in place to identify oppressive leadership?
    5. What is the process for reporting in your church?
    6. How have you helped your staff and/or congregation identify
       unhealthy types of leadership?




                                      1189
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                               ATTACHMENTS

                           Attachment 1: Definitions

The following terminology is often used by those who work with abusers and
victims. The inclusion of this list is neither an endorsement nor rejection of the
terms or authors. The viewpoints included do not necessarily reflect the beliefs
or official position of the PCA. This list is included for information and further
study.

Abuse
Abuse is the treatment of any person that is callous, often cruel, for selfish
reasons, and that has deeply detrimental effects on the person physically and/or
sexually, emotionally, and spiritually. The image of God in the victim of such
treatment is completely denied.

Accommodation Syndrome
Lacking insight to recognize, describe, and solve the problem of abuse, the
victim establishes a habitual pattern of adjustment to the perpetrator
characterized by loyalty and support of the perpetrator. The Stockholm,
Battered Women’s, and Patty Hearst Syndromes are similar.

Antisocial Personality Disorder
A pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the rights of others.225

Authoritarianism
The enforcement or advocacy of strict adherence to authority at the expense of
personal freedom.

Battered Women’s Syndrome
Behaviors and emotions of a woman who has been abused, similar to PTSD.226

Bullying
Targeted intimidation or humiliation by a person of greater physical or social
power against a person of perceived lesser status.



   225
       American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 5th ed. (Washington, DC: APA Publishing, 2013), 645.
   226
        Lenore Walker, The Battered Woman (New York: William Morrow
Paperbacks, 1980).
                                       1190
                                   APPENDIX V



Child Advocacy Centers
One of 800 centers worldwide providing standardized, comprehensive, and
coordinated multi-disciplinary management for victims and families.

Child (and Adult) Protective Services
Local government service bureau charged with responsibility of protecting
those reported to be at risk or suspected of abuse victimization.

Childhood Sexual Abuse
Involves the traumatic use of a minor child for sexual gratification by a person
in a position of power or authority and expected trustworthiness. The sexual
abuse has components of emotional, verbal, and spiritual abuse. The status
difference between the child and the abuser makes it impossible for the child
to give free, informed consent or to say “no” meaningfully.

Clergy Abuse
Clergy abuse is when a pastor uses his position of spiritual trust to harm.
Clergy abuse is always a form of spiritual abuse, but it often also takes the
form of emotional, financial, or sexual abuse. The impact of abuse by a pastor
who is ministering in the name of Jesus the Good Shepherd is devastating.
Clergy sexual abuse is not an “affair” or a “relationship” but a predatory sin
against a vulnerable sheep. When a pastor crosses any sexual boundary with a
congregant, whether a child or an adult, it is clergy sexual abuse.227

Clergy-Perpetuated Sexual Abuse
Sexual abuse occurring within the context of activities, setting, or relationships
endorsed or fostered by official or unofficial policies and procedures of a
religious institution. Such abuse typically employs spiritually persuasive
power exerted by the abuser and produces an enhanced sense of emotional and
existential betrayal in the victim.

Coercive Control
An attempt by one individual in a relationship to dominate the other for the
purpose of controlling their autonomy, freedom, and individuality as a person.
This includes both violent and nonviolent tactics. “Coercive control is used to




   227
       J. Holcomb, (2020) Abuse and the Church: Types of Abuse [PowerPoint
presentation]. Retrieved from RTS Instructure. See also the Biblical and Theological
section of this report for a fuller discussion.
                                       1191
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



instill fear and compliance in a partner. This type of mistreatment follows
regular patterns of behavior.”228

Cognitive
Refers to intellectual function, such as memory, reasoning, and implementing
prudent decisions.

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Psychotherapy that seeks to address harmful distortions in thinking, emotions,
past experiences, habits, and their effects on current behavior.

Complex PTSD
Unofficial designation of the body of effects of severe or early life trauma
affecting development and manifested by combinations of flashbacks,
dissociation, emotional dysregulation, personality disorder, and self-defeating
or harmful behaviors.

Complex Trauma
Involves stressors that are repetitive and chronic, direct harm or neglect by
those who should have been caregivers, and interpersonal violence that is
usually repeated and chronic over time. Thus, the individual is shaped over
time by the trauma.229

DARVO
An aggressive defense used by abusers consisting of Denial that the abuse took
place, Attacking the accuser by claiming they are the real victim, thereby
Reversing the Victim and the Offender.

Domestic Violence or Abuse
Domestic violence (also called intimate partner violence [IPV], domestic
abuse or relationship abuse) is a pattern of behaviors used by one partner to
maintain power and control over another partner in an intimate relationship.230

The term “domestic violence” includes felony or misdemeanor crimes of
violence committed by a current or former spouse or intimate partner of the

   228
        Lauren Paige Kennedy, “What Is Coercive Control in a Relationship?,”
WebMD, https://www.webmd.com/women/features/what-is-coercive-control#1.
    229
        Diane Langberg, Suffering and the Heart of God: How Trauma Destroys and
Christ Restores (Greensboro, NC: New Growth Press, 2015), 38.
    230
        “Understand Relationship Abuse,” National Domestic Violence Hotline,
https://www.thehotline.org/is-this-abuse/abuse-defined/.
                                     1192
                                  APPENDIX V



victim, by a person with whom the victim shares a child in common, by a
person who is cohabitating with or has cohabitated with the victim as a spouse
or intimate partner, by a person similarly situated to a spouse of the victim
under the domestic or family violence laws of the jurisdiction receiving grant
monies, or by any other person against an adult or youth victim who is
protected from that person’s acts under the domestic or family violence laws
of the jurisdiction.231

Domination232
Exerting power over others. This includes both violent and nonviolent tactics.

DSM-5
The current official psychiatric classification and definitions of mental illness.

Elder Abuse
There are several common types of elder abuse:

    •    Physical: Any injury or physical condition that impairs health or
         welfare. Some signs of physical abuse may include bruises, cuts,
         wounds, sudden change in behavior, or caregiver's refusal to allow
         visitors alone with a senior.
    •    Emotional: A pattern of ridiculing or using demeaning remarks or
         making threats to inflict physical or emotional harm. Some signs of
         emotional abuse may include intimidating, threatening, humiliating,
         and the silent treatment.
    •    Sexual: Any type of non-consensual sexual contact with an elderly
         person. Some signs of sexual abuse may include unexplained
         depression, fear or paranoia, discomfort or anxiety around certain
         people, or unexplained injuries.
    •    Financial: The illegal or improper use of a vulnerable adult or his/her
         financial resources for another's profit or advantage. Some examples
         of financial abuse may include the taking of money or property;
         forging a signature; getting a senior to sign a deed, will or power of
         attorney through deception; coercion or undue influence; or illegally
         or improperly adding names to bank accounts or safety deposit boxes.
    •    Neglect: Deprivation of food, water, medication, medical services,
         shelter, cooling, heating or other services necessary to maintain

   231
         “What Is Domestic Violence,” United States Department of Justice
https://www.justice.gov/ovw /domestic-violence#dv.
    232
        See also Section Two: Domestic Abuse in this report.
                                      1193
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         minimum physical or mental health. Some signs of neglect may
         include unclean living spaces, lack of hygiene, or no food or water in
         the house.233

Emotional Abuse [See “Psychological Abuse”]

Entitlement
A sense of privilege, an insistence on being served, a patronizing mentality,
autonomy in decision making, and defining the roles for each person in the
relationship (the king of the castle).

Forgiveness
See Attachment 9: Forgiveness.

Gaslighting
A psychological ploy used by an abuser to confuse and paralyze his victim by
refusing to listen to pleas to change, countering the memory of the victim,
blocking the discussion of the subject, trivializing the victim’s emotions and
needs, denying events and prior promises. The goal, as in the Hitchcock movie
of the name, is to cause the victim to question her sanity.

    •    Withholding: the abusive partner pretends not to understand or
         refuses to listen.
    •    Countering: the abusive partner questions the victim’s memory of
         events, even when the victim remembers them accurately.
    •    Blocking/Diverting: the abusive partner changes the subject and/or
         questions the victim’s thoughts.
    •    Trivializing: the abusive partner makes the victim’s needs or feelings
         seem unimportant.
    •    Forgetting/Denial: the abusive partner pretends to have forgotten
         what actually occurred or denies things like promises made to the
         victim.234

Grooming
“Manipulative behaviors that the abuser uses to gain access to a potential
victim, coerce them to agree to the abuse, and reduce the risk of being caught.


   233
       Holcomb, “Abuse and the Church.” Retrieved from RTS Instructure.
   234
        “What Is Gaslighting?” National Domestic Violence Hotline,
https://www.thehotline.org/what-is-gaslighting/.
                                      1194
                                   APPENDIX V



While these tactics are used most often against younger kids, teens and
vulnerable adults are also at risk.

“Grooming can take place online or in-person. It’s usually employed by a
family member or someone else in the victim’s circle of trust, such as a coach,
teacher, youth group leader or others who naturally have some interaction with
the victim.”235

Idolatry of Abuse
Worshipful thoughts and actions characterized by 1) desire to achieve power
or control; 2) strong sense of entitlement, and 3) desire to be as God.

Imago Dei
Recognition that all human beings are created by God in His Image, sharing
some of His attributes in lesser amount, always marred by sin, but fully worthy
of dignity and human rights because of that Image.

Institutional Abuse (Betrayal)
Wrongdoings perpetuated by an organization upon individuals dependent
upon that organization. Includes failure to protect or respond to abuse, neglect,
and harassment.

Intimate Partner Violence [see Domestic Abuse]

Intimidate
To make timid or fearful; frighten, especially. To compel or deter by threats.236

Justice
Distributive, retributive, and restorative activities which promote, preserve, or
restore moral health of persons and reconcile relationships.

Male privilege
An attitude of entitlement often based on notions of male hierarchy, manifested
by insistence upon complete or unquestioned authority, narrowly defined
roles, and insistence upon being served by inferiors.



   235
        “Grooming: Know the Warning Signs | RAINN,”
https://www.rainn.org/news/grooming-know-warning-signs
    236
        Merriam Webster, s.v. “frighten (v.),” https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/frighten.
                                        1195
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Mandatory Reporting
Laws of most states and countries requiring immediate reporting of known or
suspected abuse or neglect of children under 18 or elderly and the mentally or
physically infirm by teachers, health care personnel, clergy, and other
categories of occupations under good faith amnesty. Failure to report is a
felony. Reporting is typically to police, protective services, or child advocacy.

Narcissistic Personality Disorder
A pattern of grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy.237

Neglect
An act that deprives a dependent person of basic, physical or psychological
needs.238

Oppression
A biblical category that describes a pattern of coercive, controlling, and
punishing behaviors. It occurs in marriage when one spouse seeks to control
and dominate the other (Gen. 16:1; Ex. 3:7-9; 1 Sam. 25; Ps. 9:9; 72:4; 103:6;
146:7-9; Isa. 1:17; 14:3-4; 20:12-13; 54:14; Jer. 50:33-34; Zech. 7:10; 9:8;
Luke 4:18-19).239

Pedophilia
A DSM-5 diagnosis affecting up to 5% of males and 50% of child sexual
abusers, characterized by sexual urges and fantasies regarding children. It is
thought, like homosexuality, to be due in strong measure to biological
mechanisms.

Personality Disorder
DSM-5 diagnoses wherein patients exhibit core impairments of self and inter-
personal functioning that persist over long periods of time. Specifically,
defects are exhibited in self-identity, self-appraisal, self-control, goal
implementation, empathy, and intimacy.



   237
        APA, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), 645.
   238
        Jess Hill, “‘It’s Like You Go To Abuse School’: How Domestic Violence
Always Follows the Same Script,” The Guardian, June 23, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2019/jun/24/its-like-you-go-to-abuse-school-
how-domestic-violence-always-follows-the-same-script.
    239
        Darby Strickland, Domestic Abuse: Recognize, Respond, Rescue (Phillipsburg,
NJ: P&R Publishing, 2018), 3.
                                       1196
                                    APPENDIX V



Physical Abuse
Physical, spouse or partner violence are “non-accidental acts of physical force
that result . . . in physical harm.”240 This includes all acts that invoke significant
fear, such as (however, not limited to) shoving, pushing, and/or restraining.241

Power
Having control over one’s own and other’s resources; having the capacity to
influence someone else and stay uninfluenced by others.

Power Dynamics
The deleterious exercise of authority of one or more persons in an organization
over others to the benefit of the former and the detriment of the latter, typically
by limiting the voice or recourse of the latter.

Psychological Abuse
Non-accidental verbal or symbolic act that will result in harm to the well-being
of another person’s mental or emotional state.242

Psychopathic Traits
A non-DSM-5 construct characterized by emotions and behaviors that include
lack of empathy, shallow emotions, lack of remorse, grandiosity, glibness, and
conning, deceptive behaviors.

PTSD
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder [PTSD] is an anxiety problem that develops in
some people after extremely traumatic [shocking, emotionally distressing]
events, such as combat, crime [sexual assault, domestic violence, captivity] an
accident, or natural disaster [or observing a traumatic event happening to
another person]. People with PTSD may relive the event via intrusive
memories, flashbacks, and nightmares; avoid anything that reminds them of
the trauma; and have anxious feelings they didn't have before that are so
intense their lives are disrupted.243



   240
        APA, DSM, 720.
   241
       Ann Maree Goudzwaard, “Domestic Abuse,” in Encyclopedia of Biblical
Counseling, ed. Greg Gifford, accessed July 6, 2020,
https://encyclopediabc.com/2019/12/23/domestic-abuse/.
    242
        APA, DSM, 720.
    243
        “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder,” https://www.apa.org, accessed December 9,
2021, https://www.apa.org/topics/ptsd.
                                        1197
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Redemption
Salvation from sin and reconciliation from its effects.

Re-victimization
Repeated and higher frequency of new episodes of trauma and abuse
experienced by victims of previous abuse due to psychological and social
effects of the initial trauma and failure to heal, learn, and grow from the initial
trauma.

Self-Control
A gift of the Holy Spirit given through special and common grace in various
measure to overcome temptation, practice the virtue of temperance, delay
superficial gratification, and operationalize higher and often longer-term
rewards.

Sexual Assault
Sexual assault is any type of sexual behavior or contact where consent is not
freely given or obtained. It is accomplished through force, intimidation,
violence, coercion, manipulation, threat, deception, or abuse of authority.244

Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination prohibited by Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It consists of inappropriate verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature that has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual’s sense of well-being by creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment from the viewpoint of the
affected individual.245

Shepherding
To protect selflessly, courageously, and lovingly, lead, mentor, feed, and heal
those providentially and authoritatively brought under care, using the Model
of Jesus.

Sin
A violation of God and God’s laws.




   244
         Holcomb, Abuse and the Church. Retrieved from RTS Instructure.
   245
         Holcomb, Abuse and the Church. Retrieved from RTS Instructure.
                                        1198
                                  APPENDIX V



Spiritual Abuse
Spiritual abuse is an attempt to exert power and control over someone using
religion, faith, or beliefs. The Salvation Army includes “when spiritual
authority is misused to manipulate people’s emotional responses or loyalty for
the benefit of the church, institution, or of another individual.”246

Stalking
The act or crime of willfully and repeatedly following or harassing another
person in circumstances that would cause a reasonable person to fear injury or
death especially because of express or implied threats.

         Broadly: a crime of engaging in a course of conduct directed at a
         person that serves no legitimate purpose and seriously alarms, annoys,
         or intimidates that person.

NOTE: Stalking is often considered to be aggravated when the conduct
involved also violates a restraining order protecting the victim.247

Trauma
Trauma occurs when suffering overwhelms normal human coping capacities
and causes feelings of extreme shock, fear, and powerlessness. "Recurrent,
tormenting memories of atrocities witnessed or borne.”248

Trauma Triggers
Experiencing, without warning or desire, thoughts and memories associated
with trauma. These intrusive thoughts and memories can easily trigger strong
emotional and behavioral reactions, as if the trauma was recurring in the
present. The intrusive thoughts and memories can come rapidly, referred to as
flooding, and can be disruptive at the time of their occurrence.

If an individual experiences a trigger, he or she may have an increase in
intrusive thoughts and memories for a while. For instance, individuals . . . may




   246
        “Spiritual Abuse,” Salvation Army New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa
Territory, approved December 2005, https://www.salvationarmy.org.nz/research-
policy/positional-statements/spiritual-abuse.
    247
        Merriam Webster, s.v. “stalking (n.),” https://www.merriam-
webster.com/legal/stalking.
    248
        Langberg, Suffering, 5.
                                      1199
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



have a surge of intrusive thoughts of past trauma, thus making it difficult for
them to discern what is happening now versus what happened then.249

Verbal Abuse
Extremely critical, threatening, or insulting words delivered in oral or written
form and intended to demean, belittle, or frighten the recipient250




   249
        National Center for Biotechnology Information, Trauma-Informed Care in
Behavioral Health Services. Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 57.
(Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (US) Rockville, MD, 2014), CH. 3.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (US);
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK207191/
    250
        APA Dictionary of Psychology, s.v. “verbal abuse,” accessed December 9,
2021, https://dictionary.apa.org/verbal-abuse.
                                      1200
                                  APPENDIX V



                      Attachment 2: DSM* Definitions

*Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition

1. DSM-5 on Child Neglect
Child neglect is defined as any confirmed or suspected egregious act of
omission by a child’s parent or other caregiver that deprives the child of basic
age-appropriate needs and thereby results, or has reasonable potential to result,
in physical or psychological harm to the child. Child neglect encompasses
abandonment, lack of appropriate supervision, failure to attend to necessary
emotional or psychological needs, and failure to provide necessary education,
medical care, nourishment, shelter, and/or clothing.

2. DSM-5 on Child Physical Abuse
Child physical abuse is nonaccidental physical injury to a child—ranging from
minor bruises to severe fractures or death—occurring as a result of punching,
beating, kicking, biting, shaking, throwing, stabbing, choking, hitting (with a
hand, stick, strap, or other object), burning, or another method that is inflicted
by a parent, caregiver, or any other individual who has responsibility for the
child. Such injury is considered abuse regardless of whether the caregiver
intended to hurt the child. Physical discipline, such as spanking or paddling, is
not considered abuse as long as it is reasonable and causes no bodily injury to
the child.251

3. DSM-5 on Childhood Psychological Abuse
Child psychological abuse is nonaccidental verbal or symbolic acts by a child’s
parent or caregiver that result, or have reasonable potential to result, in
significant psychological harm to the child. (Physical and sexual abusive acts
are not included in this category.) Examples of psychological abuse of a child
include berating, disparaging, humiliating the child, threatening the child,
harming/abandoning—or indicating that the alleged offender will
harm/abandon—people or things that the child cares about, confining the child
(as by tying a child’s arms or legs together or binding a child to furniture or
another object, or confining a child to a small enclosed area [e.g., a closet]),
egregious scapegoating of the child, coercing the child to inflict pain on
himself or herself, and disciplining the child excessively (i.e., at an extremely
high frequency or duration, even if not at a level of physical abuse) through
physical or nonphysical means.252


   251
         APA, DSM, 717.
   252
         APA, DSM, 719.
                                      1201
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




4. DSM-5 on Child Sexual Abuse
Child sexual abuse encompasses any sexual act involving a child that is
intended to provide sexual gratification to a parent, caregiver, or other
individual who has responsibility for the child. Sexual abuse includes activities
such as fondling a child’s genitals, penetration, incest, rape, sodomy, and
indecent exposure. Sexual abuse also includes noncontact exploitation of a
child by a parent or caregiver—for example, forcing, tricking, enticing,
threatening, or pressuring a child to participate in acts for the sexual
gratification of others, without direct physical contact between child and
abuser.253

5. DSM-5 on Domestic Abuse
The DSM-5 categorizes adult maltreatment into four different manifestations.

         Physical, spouse or partner violence are “non-accidental acts of
         physical force that result . . . in physical harm.”254 This includes any
         act that invokes significant fear, such as shoving.

         Sexual abuse includes any forced or coerced sexual act against a
         person’s will.

         Neglect is an act that deprives a dependent person of basic, physical,
         or psychological needs.

         Psychological abuse is non-accidental verbal or symbolic act that will
         result in harm to the well-being of another person’s mental or
         emotional state.

All of these categories describe abuse between spouses, partners, non-spousal,
or non-partner adults (such as the elderly).255




   253
       APA, DSM, 718.
   254
       APA, DSM, 720.
   255
       APA, DSM, 720.
                                      1202
                                    APPENDIX V



                                  Attachment 3

Child Abuse Definitions

While the same dynamics of power and control are present when children are
the victims of the abuse, the expression can look different—becoming familiar
with the specific nature of child abuse is vital as we seek to safeguard children.
Child abuse can happen anywhere, and child abusers come from all walks of
life.

“Abuse” means to use wrongly; using in a way that violates the original design
or intention; using power that comes from size, strength, status, age,
development, knowledge, or mobility in such a way that we hurt the vulnerable
and exploit their trust.

Children are particularly vulnerable. They are often dependent on others, so
we also must consider acts of omission when harm is brought to a child by
failure to care or provide for their basic needs. Below you will see definitions
and examples of what child abuse looks like.

Emotional abuse is a pattern of behavior that promotes a destructive sense of
fear, obligation, shame, or guilt. It may take the form of neglecting,
frightening, isolating, belittling, exploiting, blaming, shaming, or threatening
a victim, as well as playing mind games or lying. Emotional abuse can also be
referred to as verbal and mental abuse.256

         Manifestations with children: Emotional abuse is the most common
         form of child abuse. Emotional abuse occurs when a child is
         repeatedly made to feel worthless, unloved, alone or scared.

Financial abuse is a way of controlling a person by making them
economically dependent or exploiting their resources. Financial abuse may be
subtle or overt, and its different forms include concealing financial
information, limiting a victim’s access to assets, controlling their ability to
acquire money, exploiting their resources, or dictating how funds are spent.257
        Manifestations with children: Children can be victims of identity and
        financial fraud. This type of abuse occurs when someone intentionally
        uses the child’s Social Security Number to benefit themselves

   256
       Darby Strickland, Is it Abuse?: A Biblical Guide to Identifying Domestic
Abuse and Helping Victims (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2020), 289.
   257
       Ibid.
                                        1203
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           financially. Minors who are working can also be exploited or have
           their earnings stolen.

Physical abuse is the intentional or reckless use of physical force that may
result in bodily injury or physical pain. Physical abuse does not need to cause
pain or leave a bruise; it also includes actions that lead to harm such as
preventing a victim from sleeping or refusing them medical care. Physically
abusive actions range from throwing things all the way to choking or
beating.258
         Manifestations with children: any non-accidental physical injury to
         the child and can include striking, kicking, burning, or biting the child,
         or any action that results in a physical impairment of the child. It can
         also include acts or circumstances that threaten the child with harm or
         create a substantial risk of harm to the child's health or welfare. In
         fifteen States, the crime of human trafficking, including labor
         trafficking, involuntary servitude, or trafficking of minors, is included
         in the definition of child abuse.

Spiritual abuse occurs when an oppressor establishes control and domination
by using Scripture, doctrine, or their “leadership role” as weapons. Spiritual
abuse may mask itself as religious practice and may be used to shame or
punish. For example, using Bible verses to shame or control, demanding
unconditional obedience, or using biblical texts or beliefs to minimize or
rationalize abusive behaviors.259
         Manifestations with children: Spiritual abuse in childhood may be
         tricky to recognize, as the line between abuse and influence can at
         times be blurry. However, a child should not be shamed. Children are
         particularly vulnerable when Scripture is used abusively to control
         them.

Sexual abuse is any sexual activity when consent is not obtained, is coerced,
or not freely given. Verbal sexual abuse includes sexual remarks about a
person’s body or sexual comments. Visual abuse can include being forced to
watch pornography, exhibitionism, voyeurism, intrusion on one’s privacy, and
unwanted photography or sexting. Physical sexual abuse includes touching
sexual parts of the body, being forced to touch another, putting objects or body
parts in another’s orifices. There are also many new ways that the digital
medium provides opportunities for sexual abuse. Sexual abuse is exploitive.


   258
         Ibid.
   259
         Ibid.
                                       1204
                                     APPENDIX V



Sometimes the actual act of abuse may seem inconsequential (rubbing of feet),
but when a perpetrator’s behavior is purposeful and he or she is aroused, the
action becomes abusive and predatory in nature.
        Manifestations with children: Sexual abuse can be defined by any
        form of sexual contact between a child and an adult, a child and an
        older youth, or between two minors when one forces it on the other.
        This could include showing or talking about sexually explicit material,
        sexual touching, and non-touching acts like exhibitionism, voyeurism,
        exposure to pornography, possession of child pornography,
        photography of a child for sexual gratification, or the solicitation of a
        child for prostitution.

Neglect, while equally harmful to an individual, differs from abuse in that it is
typically caused by a lack of action. Neglect is the failure of a parent or
caregiver to provide proper care for a child or dependent (elderly or disabled
person). Proper care includes providing adequate shelter, clothing, food,
medical care, supervision, and education. Neglect is often a result of ongoing
mistreatment but can also occur from one unattended instance. Neglect that is
caused by poverty can be remediated by providing concrete services for
families to protect and provide for their children.
         Manifestations with children: Inadequate supervision—leaving
         children who are unable to care for themselves home alone, failing to
         protect children from safety hazards, or leaving them with inadequate
         caregivers. Emotional neglect—exposing a child to domestic abuse or
         substance abuse, failing to provide affection or parental care.
         Educational neglect—failing to provide a child with an education,
         allowing a child to repeatedly skip school, or ignoring a child’s special
         education needs.260




   260
         For more information see https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/focus/acts/
                                         1205
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                Attachment 4

Signs of Child Abuse

Children who have been abused may display a range of behavioral cues and
physical manifestations. These signs do not mean that abuse has occurred, but
they give reason to inquire what is happening with the child. Whether or not it
is abuse, these distress signals are important to tend to.

The following are examples from six categories: General Behavioral Clues,
General Physical Symptoms, Behavioral Cues of Parent or Caregiver, Specific
Symptoms for Physical Abuse, Specific Symptoms for Sexual Abuse, and the
Signs of Neglect.

1. General behavioral clues that might signal abuse
      • Infants excessive crying or developmental delay
      • Fear, anxiety, clinging
      • Phobias
      • Nightmares, sleeping problems (regressive)
      • Bedwetting (regressive) or defecating in one’s pants
      • Social withdrawal
      • Hyperactivity
      • Poor concentration/distractibility
      • Decreased school performance
      • Speech disorders
      • Regressive behavior for age
      • Fear of parent
      • Exhibits extremes in behavior, such as being overly compliant or
         demanding, extremely passive, or aggressive
      • Is either inappropriately adult (e.g., parenting other children) or
         inappropriately infantile (e.g., frequently rocking or head-
         banging)
      • An inability to develop emotional bonds with others
      • Constant worry about doing something wrong
      • Showing little interest in friends and activities
      • Eating issues
      • Doesn’t get medical, dental, or mental health care
      • Missing school often
      • Poor weight gain and growth
      • Depression, passivity
                                     1206
                                  APPENDIX V



         •   Increased verbal abuse or physically aggressive behavior with
             others
         •   Being the target of bullying
         •   Destroys or injures objects or pets
         •   Substance abuse
         •   Self-harm such as cutting
         •   Angry outbursts
         •   Anxiety
         •   Depression
         •   Not wanting to be left alone or return to a particular individual(s)
         •   Fear of going home
         •   Always on high alert
         •   Avoiding a certain person for no clear reason
         •   Symptoms of PTSD
         •   OCD-like behaviors
         •   Avoidance of undressing
         •   Withdrawal to touch
         •   Overly compliant

2. General physical symptoms that might signal abuse
      • Headaches
      • Abdominal pain, chronic
      • Abdominal pain, acute—blunt trauma may not show external
         marks—look for distention, tenderness, absent bowel sounds
      • Vague somatic complaints, often chronic
      • Worsening medical problems, such as asthma
      • Frequent, unexplained sore throat
      • Abnormal weight gain or loss
      • Reluctance to use an extremity
      • Difficulty walking or sitting
      • Genital discomfort or painful urination or defecation
      • Unexplained symptoms—vomiting, irritability, or abnormal
         respiration may represent head trauma261

   261
      This list was compiled from multiple sources:
   M. B. Rizvi, (2022, January 19). Pennsylvania Child Abuse Recognition and
Reporting. StatPearls [Internet]. Retrieved March 20, 2022,
from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK565852/
   “Signs and Symptoms of Abuse/Neglect,” Child Abuse, Stanford Medicine
(website), http://childabuse.stanford.edu/screening/signs.html.
                                      1207
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



3. Behavioral clues of a parent or caregiver who might be perpetrating
abuse
      • Offers conflicting, unconvincing, or no explanation for the child’s
          injury or provides an explanation that is not consistent with the
          injury
      • Shows little concern for the child or appears indifferent towards
          them
      • Sees the child as entirely bad, burdensome, or worthless
      • Behaves irrationally or in a bizarre manner
      • Abuses alcohol or other drugs*
      • Uses harsh physical discipline with the child
      • Tries to be the child’s friend rather than assume an adult role
      • Makes up excuses to be alone with a child who is not their own
      • Talks with the child about the adult’s personal problems or
          relationships
      • Constantly blames, belittles, or berates the child
      • Describes the child negatively
      • Overtly rejects the child
      • Demands a level of physical or academic performance the child
          cannot achieve
      • Looks primarily to the child for care, attention, and satisfaction of
          the parent’s emotional needs
      • Denies the existence of—or blames the child for— the child’s
          problems in school or at home
      • Asks other caregivers to use harsh physical discipline if the child
          misbehaves

    *Substance abuse by parents: Keep in mind parental substance use is
    included in the definition of child abuse or neglect in many states.
        • Exposing a child to harm prenatally due to the parent’s use of legal
            or illegal drugs or other substances
        • Manufacturing methamphetamine in the presence of a child
        • Selling, distributing, or giving illegal drugs or serving alcohol
            illegally to a child


    “What Is Child Abuse and Neglect?: Recognizing the Signs and Symptoms,”
Child Welfare Information Gateway,
https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubPDFs/whatiscan.pdf.


                                     1208
                                  APPENDIX V



         •   Using a controlled substance that impairs the caregiver’s ability to
             adequately care for the child

4. Signs of Physical Abuse
If symptoms and/or signs of physical injury require immediate medical care,
call 911 or take the child to a hospital. Doctors will investigate for signs of
abuse and provide necessary care. This is a very important first step. Some
states have laws mandating reporting when there is a reasonable suspicion of
child abuse. It is important to know your state laws.

Some of the signs of physical abuse are as follows:
       • Has unexplained injuries, such as burns, bites, bruises, broken
           bones, dislocations, or black eyes
       • Has fading bruises or other noticeable marks after an absence from
           school or church
           o Bite marks ‒ human bites are more superficial than animal,
                and show up better 2-3 days later
           o Burn marks – cigarette, rope, immersion, or shape of hot
                object; stun gun burns in pairs and immersion burns with
                sharp line of demarcation
           o Marks left from restraints on axilla or extremities
       • Defensive injuries on forearms
       • Trauma to ear
       • Lacerations
       • Hair loss
       • Facial injuries without reasonable explanation
       • Oral/dental injuries, such as torn or bruised frenulum, lips, teeth,
           palate, tongue, or oral mucosa
       • Head injury, retinal hemorrhage, hematoma
       • Vomiting, irritability, or abnormal respiration may represent head
           trauma262


   262
        This list was compiled from multiple sources:
    M. B. Rizvi, (2022, January 19). Pennsylvania Child Abuse Recognition and
Reporting. StatPearls [Internet]. Retrieved March 20, 2022,
from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK565852/
    “Signs and Symptoms of Abuse/Neglect,” Child Abuse, Stanford Medicine
(website), http://childabuse.stanford.edu/screening/signs.html.
    “What Is Child Abuse and Neglect?: Recognizing the Signs and Symptoms,”
Child Welfare Information Gateway,
https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubPDFs/whatiscan.pdf.
                                      1209
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       •   Intra-abdominal trauma
       •   Seems scared, anxious, depressed, withdrawn, or aggressive
       •   Seems frightened of his or her parents and protests or cries when
           it is time to go home
       •   Shrinks at the approach of adults
           o Assumes protective posture (hands/arms up over face and
                 head, turning away, curling up in a ball) with any aggressive
                 approach
           o Shows changes in eating and sleeping habits
       •   Directly discloses injury by a parent or another adult caregiver
       •   The child abuses animals or pets
       •   The child directly reports the abuse

5. Signs of Sexual Abuse
       • Has difficulty walking or sitting
       • Experiences bleeding, bruising, or swelling in their private parts
       • Suddenly refuses to go to school, activity, or church
       • Reports nightmares or bedwetting
       • Experiences a sudden change in appetite
       • Attaches very quickly to strangers or new adults in their
           environment
       • Demonstrates bizarre, sophisticated, or unusual sexual knowledge
           or behavior
       • Pregnancy or STDs, especially for boys and girls under 14 years
           old
       • Runs away
       • Reports sexual abuse by a parent or another adult caregiver
       • Sexual knowledge, language, and/or behaviors that are
           inappropriate for the child’s age
       • Bloody, torn, or stained underwear
       • Bruising, tearing, bleeding, discharge from genital or rectal area
       • Avoidance of undressing
       • Withdrawal to touch
       • Overly compliant

6. Signs of Neglect
       • Is frequently absent from school



                                    1210
                         APPENDIX V



•   Begs or steals food or money
•   Lacks needed medical care (including immunizations), dental
    care, glasses, wound care, or medication
•   Is consistently dirty and has severe body odor
•   Lacks sufficient clothing for the weather
•   Living in an unsuitable home environment, such as having no heat
•   Left alone for extended periods of time
•   Taking on the role of caregiver for other family members
•   Poor language or social skills
•   Regular illness or infections
•   Repeated accidental injuries, often caused by lack of supervision
•   Skin issues, such as sores, rashes, flea bites, scabies, or ringworm
•   Thin or swollen tummy
•   Tiredness
•   Abuses alcohol or other drugs
•   Reports there is no one at home to provide care
•   Fails to thrive, poor weight gain, malnutrition




                             1211
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                Attachment 5

Consequences of Child Abuse

Since the 1990s, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has
conducted studies of Adverse Childhood Experiences which include physical,
emotional, sexual abuse, and witnessing trauma or experiencing neglect in the
home. The conclusions of these studies are startling in their demonstration of
the prevalence of childhood abuse and its powerful impact on the lives of
children and adults.

Consequences of child abuse of any type are serious, pervasive, and multi-
dimensional. Types of abuse and particulars of the age of victim and
relationship to the perpetrator(s) do affect the health, social, and spiritual
outcomes, but there are more similarities than differences.

In general, abuse of children between ages of four and twelve is particularly
serious because they lack the intellectual and developmental tools not only to
defend themselves, but also process the experience in a way that avoids severe
disruption of brain/mind emotional, reward, pain, and cognitive pathways.
Abused and neglected children of any age have emotional scars that affect
current and future perceptions of self, God, the world, and their bodies. These
scars are displayed often through maladaptive behaviors, chronic pain, “acting
out” with emotional, physical, or sexual control problems. These often lead to
academic, interpersonal, social, and occupational stress and failure. Childhood
abuse often occurs to the children who are most vulnerable:
         • Those with physical or mental challenges,
         • Those with atypical interests or behaviors,
         • Those in families undergoing stress or whose caregivers have
             suffered abuse themselves,
         • Families with rigid and authoritarian fathers and/or overwhelmed
             mothers,
         • Where there is alcohol or drug abuse, and
         • When and where there is social, economic, and/or moral
             breakdown.

Unrecognized and untreated, childhood abuse causes demonstrable changes in
brain architecture and function associated with the frontal lobes (executive and
self-representative thinking), amygdala (emotions of fear and anxiety),
hippocampus (memory processing), and various networks dealing with

                                     1212
                                  APPENDIX V



emotional regulation, self-control, theory of mind (knowledge of self and
others), and especially reward and pain.

Victims often try to treat their emotional distress with food, alcohol, drugs,
sex, and other addictive behaviors, or may be attracted to or fall prey to groups
of individuals who have had similar experiences. Unfortunately, many
childhood victims become repeatedly victimized as adults by placing
themselves in risky situations with risky people.

Abuse very frequently has a multi-generational legacy. Abused children
become parents more likely to abuse their children and raise them in
challenging environments and circumstances, perpetuating suffering.
Abused children are much more likely to be unhealthy and obese as adults,
have HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases, misuse tobacco, alcohol,
and drugs, have severe anxiety, depression, cut themselves, and attempt
suicide, have academic and work performance problems, and have chronic
stress-related diseases involving the cardiac, gastrointestinal, endocrine, and
nervous systems.

Maladaptive behaviors not only produce poor health and physical suffering,
but also frequently isolate victims from family, social, and spiritual
nourishment needed for an abundant life. They are often “difficult” and
spiritually injured, held in the shackles of victimhood, self-defeating, ethically
and morally challenged, and “hard to love.”

Nothing is impossible, however, for victims to retain the image of God.
Through the body of Christ, the Holy Spirit can redeem anyone, and the church
is called to come alongside to offer the hope of the gospel and the love of Jesus
Christ.




                                      1213
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                Attachment 6

Comprehensive Child Protection Policy

Every church should have a Comprehensive Child Protection Policy. This
policy should foster the safety of children and youth and be suited specifically
to the church’s context. It should also cover prevention and how to respond.
While the church’s primary concern is spiritual, it must not neglect legal
responsibilities (Rom. 13). A good policy will also help when allegations of
child abuse are unclear, however a violation of the policy has occurred.

1. A child protection policy should include (but not be limited to) . . .

        •   Definitions of abuse that align with your state
            (https://www.childwelfare.gov/topics/can/defining/).
        •   Who the church will train and how often the church will repeat the
            training
        •   The content of the church’s training (recognition, response,
            reporting)
        •   The church’s standards for a staff hire (background check,
            references, compliance with church’s policy, abuse training)
        •   Protocols established prior to engaging volunteers (length of
            attendance prior to volunteering with children and youth, written
            application, background check, compliance with church’s policy,
            interview, abuse training)
        •   How children and youth will be supervised
            o Consider all contexts including but not limited to nursery,
                 Sunday school, youth group (including all overnight activity),
                 VBS, children’s church, other sponsored events.
            o Protocols required: for example, glass doors, two adult
                 systems, bathroom usage, guidelines for appropriate touch
        •   Guidelines for staff and volunteers engaging with youth on social
            media, texting/messaging, and other communications
        •   Transportation to and from events and how the church will inform
            parents of arrangements
        •   Commitment to make the church buildings safe
            o Consider general safety issues and first aid needs as well as
                 how the church might better monitor the building and those
                 who use it.
        •   Determination of before the need arises how to respond to an
            allegation of abuse
                                     1214
                                     APPENDIX V



             o    Determination of how, when, and where the church will make
                  a report
                       ▪ Inclusion of your state’s requirements for mandatory
                           reporting and your church’s desire to cooperate with
                           the law
             o    Creation of a plan to notify the parents of a victim (assuming
                  they are not the offender)
             o    Plan for how and when to notify the congregation of the
                  allegation.
                       ▪ Determination of how to prevent future harm
                       ▪ Investigation into the legal risks involved in publicly
                           disclosing a situation
                       ▪ Investigation into the legal risks of not disclosing
                       ▪ Determination of who might be harmed if the
                           information is or is not shared
                       ▪ Determination of confidentiality for a victim if the
                           victim is a minor
                       ▪ Consideration of creating a prepared statement263
                       ▪ Creation of a response team or identify persons who
                           can field questions and facilitate other potential
                           victims who come forward
             o    Determination of how the leaders will engage accused
                  members who attend your church and what will be required
                  of the alleged offender during the investigation
             o    Instruction to alleged offenders to have no contact with
                  victims or witnesses
                       ▪ Determination of how to implement the above
             o    Determination of how the church will interact with the
                  insurance carrier
                       ▪ Consideration as to if the church will initiate and
                           oversee the victim care, shepherding, and protection,
                           or will the church’s carrier set the pace? Keep in
                           mind, insurance companies tend toward focusing on
                           the institution’s protection. These two approaches are
                           often at odds. Be aware and plan before a crisis.
             o    Determination of how a victim will receive pastoral care


   263
       A carefully prepared statement is often best, one that affirms that the church is
aware of the situation and is cooperating fully with any investigation. It is much
easier to navigate difficult questions when a response team is already in place and is
accustomed to working together.
                                         1215
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



             o   Determination of which trained staff member will take the
                 lead in coordination of care264
             o   Creation of a shepherding plan

2. If a known offender seeks to be involved with your congregation,
consider the following:

         •   Church leadership should understand the consequences of having
             an offender in the congregation.
             o Resource: Victor Vieth, “Ministering to Adult Sex Offenders:
                 Ten Lessons from Henry Gerecke,” Wisconsin Lutheran
                 Quarterly, Vol. 112, No. 3 (Summer 2015).
                 https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b0a335c45776ee022e
                 fd309/t/5bb46d2453450a1e7e6ff954/1538551076662/Minist
                 ering%2Bto%2BSex%2BOffenders%2B%28Vieth%29.pdf.
         •   If you are willing to receive known offenders into your
             congregation:
             o Develop a comprehensive plan to protect church members.
             o Determine how to monitor the individual.
                     ▪ Obtain a detailed history of the individual and the
                          accusations.
                     ▪ Determine the type of treatment needed for the
                          offender’s ongoing care.
                     ▪ Determine the type of ongoing care for the vulnerable
                          in your church.
                     ▪ Set boundaries and terms for the offender.
                               • Require the offender’s cooperation.
             o Determine if the offender will be monitored.
                     ▪ Require they sign an agreement.


   264
        Examples:
     Child Protection Policy, Capitol Hill Baptist Church, revised April 2019,
https://c52d388b85e6c47bef5d-
9ff91644b80b1213b3e9d43ad0f0e963.ssl.cf2.rackcdn.com/uploaded/c/0e4009729_1
583507111_chbc-cpp.pdf.
    and
    Child Protection Policy, Lititz Church of the Brethren, updated May 2017,
https://lititzcob.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Child-Protection-
Policy.update.2017-1.pdf.


                                     1216
                        APPENDIX V



    o    Communicate to the congregation that a known offender is in
         their presence and the church’s plan.
    o Determine support for the other victims in your community as
         they navigate engaging an offender in their congregation.
    o Determine the offender’s access to children.
    o Determine how to support a known offender’s spiritual
         growth.
    o Provide additional options for them such as attending an
         adult-only small group.
•   Determine if an outside agency will . . .
    o help,
    o create a plan,
    o train,
    o commit to reviewing the policy with your church, and
    o screen employees and volunteers.
•   Determine when any policy will be adopted and enforced.
•   Determine how any policy will be shared or posted and how often
    it needs to be reviewed.




                           1217
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                  Attachment 7

Myths About Abuse

Child and adult abuse, rape, and assault, being clandestine and typically
unspeakable or unstudied by most, are subject among both lay people and
professionals to incorrect beliefs, biases, and stereotypical assumptions. The
“myths” of abuse significantly traumatize victims, subvert justice, and impede
prevention. Myths of abuse are not congruent to the reality of a fallen, sinful
world and thus provide a psychological defense as well as endorsement of
status quo.265 While some myths are specific to various types of abuse, they
generally fall into four categories:266

         1. Minimization of the prevalence of the problem,
         2. Minimization of the extent of the harm,
         3. Diffusion of offender responsibility and blaming the victim, and
         4. Stereotyping offenders.

1. Abuse is rare.
Abuse is not rare. Over half of murdered women were killed by a current or
former partner. Approximately one in four women and one in seven men have
been victims of intimate partner abuse.267 In 2019, the Department for Health
and Human Services reported that 656,000 children were confirmed by state
agencies as victims of abuse, a national rate of 8.9 per 1,000 children. 268
Another study estimates that 37% of children will have a visit from local child
protective services by the time they turn 18.269 By extrapolating these data, we

   265
        Jay Peters, “Measuring Myths about Domestic Violence: Development and
Initial Validation of the Domestic Violence Myth Acceptance Scale,” Journal of
Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma 16, no. 1 (2008), 1-23.
    266
        Lisa DeMarni Cromer, Rachel E. Goldsmith, “Child Sexual Abuse Myths:
Attitudes, Beliefs, and Individual Differences,” Journal of Child Sexual Abuse 19,
no. 6 (2010), 618-47.
    267
        “National Statistics,” NCADV (National Coalition Against Domestic
Violence), accessed December 24, 2021, https://ncadv.org/STATISTICS.
    268
        U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Administration for Children
and Families, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, Children’s Bureau,
Child Maltreatment 2019 (January 14, 2021), 20,
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/research-data-technology/statistics-research/child-
maltreatment.
    269
        Hyunil Kim et al., “Lifetime Prevalence of Investigating Child Maltreatment
Among US Children,” American Journal of Public Health 107, no. 2 (February 1,
2017), 274-280.
                                        1218
                                    APPENDIX V




estimate that between 6% and 10% of children will be state-confirmed victims
of child abuse by the time they turn 18. Since many instances of abuse go
unreported, the actual rate of child abuse is likely far higher.270

2. Domestic violence is only physical abuse.
Abuse is the maltreatment of another person that is callous, cruel, for selfish
reasons, and that has deeply detrimental effects on the person physically and/or
sexually, emotionally, and spiritually. Physical violence is only one tactic of
abuse. Domestic violence may also include emotional, sexual, spiritual, and
economic abuse. Each of these deeply wound the victim’s inner and outer
person in ways which are not always clearly evident to others.

3. Abuse is a private matter and has little social effect.
The harms of abuse are immediate, pervasive, longstanding, and
multigenerational. Abuse destroys a person’s personality, joy, physical,
mental, and spiritual health. In so doing, it corrupts the expression of the image
of God in the victim. Abuse is not simply a private, personal matter, rather it
is a public health disaster.

4. The victim is somehow responsible for the abuse.
The sin of sexual assault is not primarily sexual in nature. What a woman wears
or does will not cause sexual assault. Scripture categorizes sexual abuse as an
act of violence, not sexual immorality. In Deuteronomy 22:26, the assault is
likened to murder, an act of violence. In addition, the passage shows that the
victim has no responsibility for the attack and the perpetrator alone must be
held accountable (Deut. 22:25). Also, “Abusive behavior is intentional—it is
not about anger management and is never the victim’s fault. Nothing anyone
says or does gives anyone the right to hurt someone.”271


   270
        One study noted that prevalence of childhood sexual abuse alone may be as high
as 7%, which is about seven times that of instances substantiated by state authorities.
Another noted that the percentage of victims who did not report their abuse in a study
survey was approximately 50%. Both these figures suggest that actual instances of
abuse far exceed official numbers. See Glen A. Kercher and Marilyn McShane, “The
Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse Victimization in an Adult Sample of Texas
Residents,” Child Abuse & Neglect 8, no. 4 (1984), 495-501; and David M. Fergusson,
L. J. Horwood, and L. J. Woodward, “The Stability of Child Abuse Reports: A
Longitudinal Study of the Reporting Behaviour of Young Adults,” Psychological
Medicine 30, no. 3 (May 2000), 529–44.
    271
        “Myths About Abuse - Hope’s Door New Beginning Center,” n.d.,
https://hdnbc.org/get-educated/learn-about-abuse/myths.
                                         1219
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




5. Victims have a type of personality that seeks and encourages abuse.
The abuser is responsible for the abuse. There is no research that conclusively
suggests there are people with specific personalities that are abused more than
others.

6. It’s his word against hers.
False reports of abuse are rare.272 Most abuse happens in secret. Witnesses are
also rare. It is not unreasonable to believe one party over the other. In
Deuteronomy 22:25-27, the case law explains that a victim of rape (where
there are no witnesses) should be believed and the accused held accountable.
Educating leaders and congregations, training people to recognize abuse, and
utilizing advocates is the solution for avoiding false reports.273



    272
        “In contrast, when more methodologically rigorous research has been
conducted, estimates for the percentage of false reports begin to converge around 2-
8%.” Kimberly A. Lonsway, Joanne Archambault, and David Lisak, “False Reports:
Moving Beyond the Issue to Successfully Investigate and Prosecute Non-Stranger
Sexual Assault,” National Sexual Violence Resource Center, 2009, accessed March
2022, https://www.nsvrc.org/publications/articles/false-reports-moving-beyond-
issue-successfully-investigate-and-prosecute-non-s.
    “The prevalence of false allegations is between 2% and 10%.” David Lisak et al,,
“False Allegations of Sexual Assualt: An Analysis of Ten Years of Reported Cases,”
Violence Against Women 16, no. 12 (December 2010): 1318-34,
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/1077801210387747.
    “Reputable studies on this indicate that only between 2-7% of abuse claims are
false.” Brad Hambrick, “Why Is It So Hard to Have Constructive Conversations
about Abuse?,” Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist
Convention, February 14, 2022, https://erlc.com/resource-library/articles/why-is-it-
so-hard-to-have-constructive-conversations-about-abuse/.
    We must also distinguish between the report of a victim and the report of another
person who may suspect abuse. Approximately 80% of reports of child abuse to
child protective services end up being unsubstantiated. But this is because many
states require mandated reporting based on a reasonable suspicion that abuse is or
may occur. False reporting of physical or sexual abuse by victims is rare. One study
of college women reporting sexual assault found that the incidence of false reporting
was between 2% and 10%; see David Lisak et al., “False Allegations.”
    273
        Christine Herrman, “Decreasing the Number of Incorrectly ‘Unfounded’
Sexual Assault Reports” (PowerPoint presentation), April 2012, Battered Women’s
Justice Project (website), https://www.bwjp.org/resource-center/resource-
results/decreasing-the-number-of-incorrectly-unfounded-sexual-assault-reports.html.
                                        1220
                                  APPENDIX V



7. I know him, and he couldn’t be an abuser!
Even specially trained individuals suggest it can be very difficult to identify
an abuser in public settings. Image management is “used every day by abusers
throughout the world.”274 Abusive people are very manipulative in their
relationships. Deception is how they maintain power;275 therefore, they are
well-versed at how to convince others of their innocence.
8. In fact, she seems crazy!
On the other hand, a victim of abuse will have suffered emotional trauma, have
difficulty telling her story, downplay and/or rationalize the abuse, and be
overwhelmed in talking about it. Power dynamics foster exculpable
explanations for the abuser and negative perspectives of the victim’s character
and behavior. This reinforces inertia for just and remedial action, stigmatizes
victims, and perpetuates recurrence of sin in an atmosphere of silence.
9. Abusers have an anger problem.
Abusers decide to abuse. Their self-idolatry is deeply ingrained. Anger is only
one tool the abuser uses to enforce control through fear.
10. If the abuse is infrequent, it is not that serious.
To maintain control of the victim, an abuser will use various threats. These
threats may be physical, verbal, economic, or spiritual in nature. Threats need
not be ongoing; one instance of expressing the potential for harm is enough to
control victims from risking future harm. For example, hurting a beloved pet
is an example of what an abuser can and may do to the victim. Though there
is no physical violence to the victim, they are made aware of what might
happen if they step out of line. Once that control is established, the victim will
remain constantly vigilant to future threats and bow to the abuser’s unbiblical
domination.
11. Abusers are from a particular economic class, religion, ethnicity, etc.
Abusers are from every socio-economic class, religion, nationality, profession,
age, political affiliation, and culture. Recent history demonstrates that well-
educated, wealthy, and charismatic abusers are often “respected” members of
society and the church.
Though some societies (or environments) provide an environment for the
flourishing of abuse, all groups of people experience abuse due to the ravages
of sin in the world.



   274
       Wade Mullen, Something’s Not Right: Decoding the Hidden Tactics of Abuse
and Freeing Yourself from Its Power (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2020), 3.
   275
       Mullen, Something’s Not Right, 15.
                                      1221
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




12. Substance abuse creates abusers.
Abuse is caused by a person’s desire for control and power over another
person. Alcohol or drug addictions do not create abusers. However, “when
someone is inebriated from drugs or alcohol, they are likely to lose control of
their inhibitions. Being under the influence of any substance greatly increases
the chances of abusive behavior.”276

13. Reporting abuse is a way to get attention.
Reporting abuse comes with great cost. The rarity of reporting is evidence that
there is significant difficulty in bringing an abusive person’s behavior into the
light. Victims must take into consideration the likely disbelief of their story,
unfounded shame, and the unlikelihood of restitution from authorities both in
the church or government. Prosecution of abuse is rare. If a victim reports
abuse, they are likely desperate to stop the oppressor from further harming
them and/or other victims.

14. The victim can always get out of the relationship.
Often, victims do not believe they have a safe place to go. In addition, there
may be financial difficulty in leaving the relationship. In order to leave the
abuser, most victims will need an advocate or advocacy group to navigate the
procurement of safe lodging, meals, a job, childcare, and the court system.

15. The persistence of abuse myths.
Why do myths persist? Because abuser peer groups foster them, buffering
shame.277 Victims explain they suffer because of a perceived need to keep
quiet278 and because those to whom they might report are insufficiently
educated to adequately believe and act on the truth.279 Building a church more
likely to be free of abuse is to dispel these myths that perpetuate the evil.



   276
        “Addiction and Domestic Violence,” Addiction Center, edited February 1,
2022, https://www.addictioncenter.com/addiction/domestic-violence/.
    277
        Charlene Collibee et al. “The Influence of Peer Support and Peer Acceptance
of Rape Myths on Multiple Forms of Interpersonal Violence among Youth,” Journal
of Interpersonal Violence 36, no. 15-16 (August 2021): 7185-7201.
    278
        Eric M. Cooke et al., “Examining the Relationship between Victimization,
Psychopathy, and the Acceptance of Rape Myths,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence
(October 18, 2020), https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0886260520966669.
    279
        Marta Ferragut et al., “What Do We Know about Child Sexual Abuse?: Myths
and Truths in Spain,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence 37, no. 1-2 (May 12, 2020),
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0886260520918579.
                                       1222
                                   APPENDIX V



                                 Attachment 8

Shepherding the Whistleblower

Unfortunately, organizations in need of a whistleblower are those most likely
to suppress, reject, banish, or destroy messengers. Loyalty to an organization
tends to supersede truth. Whistleblowers, like prophets, call their audience to
recognize evil and purge it. Reliable, confidential, and anonymous reporting
systems capable of instituting intervention are critical.

The recognition of the need for safe reporting prompted the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002. This provides legal protection to whistleblowers in any
organization, including churches. According to the ECFA,280 punishing a
whistleblower in any way is a criminal offense. Even if claims are unfounded,
the informant cannot be reprimanded. A reasonable belief or suspicion that a
violation of federal law exists is sufficient to report.

The ECFA suggests the following for leaders in order to protect and
appropriately respond to whistleblowers:
        • Provide confidential and anonymous, well-known, and easy
            means of reporting,
        • Facilitate reporting of all types of suspected wrongdoing, not just
            the most serious,
        • Focus on getting the full set of facts from the informant,
        • Have a systematic process of tracking information and follow up
            to the informant,
        • Put the information into the hands of those who can act,
        • Have external and independent options for investigation, and
        • Protect the whistleblower by maintaining confidentiality and
            preventing retaliation of any kind.

Whistleblowers may ultimately be identified either by friends of the accused,
or through mismanagement of the investigatory process. Leadership must
anticipate this possibility and arrange for and ensure appropriate spiritual and
emotional encouragement. Protecting the informant and their family will be
necessary. Public statements of endorsement help support the informant.


   280
        “Fraud and Whistleblower Protection for Churches,” Evangelical Council for
Financial Accountability, accessed August 22, 2021,
https://www.ecfa.church/Content/Fraud-and-Whistleblower-Protection-CHURCH.
                                       1223
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                 Attachment 9

Forgiveness

1. Introduction

“Forgiveness is one of the foundational acts of Christian practice and
theology.”281 Jesus taught that those unwilling to forgive would face the same
fate as the “unforgiving servant” (Matt. 18:21-35). Jesus repeated the same
idea when He taught the disciples to pray, “For if you forgive others their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you, but if you do not forgive
others their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses” (Matt.
6:14-15). John Calvin wrote, “Those who refuse to forget the injuries which
have been done to them, devote themselves willingly and deliberately to
destruction, and knowingly prevent God from forgiving them.”282

Forgiveness is clearly important to God. However, forgiveness is not
necessarily easily offered. Whether due to a misunderstanding of the Bible’s
teaching, or sinful rebellion, forgiveness can be elusive. In addition, when the
offense is particularly destructive to a person’s physical, emotional, and
spiritual health, the wickedness compounds this difficulty.

Abuse may have traumatic consequences, resulting in a long and difficult
process of healing. The abuser may be responsible for injuries that continue to
plague the survivor. The emotional trauma caused by verbal abuse may have
long-term physical effects. Those who suffer from spiritual abuse may struggle
to disassociate the emotional and physical abuse from their understanding of
the nature of God.

These effects of abuse must not be minimized. The survivor need not be held
responsible, nor rushed to simply forgive and “get over it.” The effects are
normal, emotional, physical, and spiritual consequences of abuse. When
counseling victims and survivors, an accurate understanding of the meaning,
means, and goal of forgiveness is necessary to prevent further harm to the
hurting member of the flock. Helping guide victims of evil atrocities
committed against their soul and body (inner and outer man) toward biblical
forgiveness is a necessary, yet sensitive, process.

   281
       Bridget Illian, “Church Discipline and Forgiveness in Matthew 18:15-35,”
Currents in Theology and Mission 37, no. 6 (December 2010): 444–50.
   282
       John Calvin, Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke, vol. 1, Christian Classics
Ethereal Library (website), https://www.ccel.org/ccel/calvin/calcom31.ix.lv.html.
                                      1224
                                   APPENDIX V




2. What Does It Mean To Forgive?

A definition of forgiveness is, “A decision to release someone from suffering
punishment or penalty for his sin.”283 Diane Langberg says forgiveness is, “to
lay aside, let go, put away, yield up, pardon.” She writes the reason there is a
need to forgive is that “something awful has been done” to one of God’s
image-bearers.284 The abusive actions are sin, and sin isolates man from God
and from his neighbor. Sin is punishable by death in the heavenly courts (Rom.
6:23). Sin is not something to be minimized or denied, rather brought into the
light and confessed before God and the offended party.

Dr. Robert Burns discusses forgiveness in two ways, legal and relational.285
Regarding the legal aspect, Burns explains that law breaking deserves a
penalty. Jesus, the only holy and righteous Son of God, willingly paid that
penalty by His death on the cross. His sacrifice made forgiveness possible
(Luke 24:47). The process of forgiving includes the lawbreaker confessing,
repenting, and receiving God’s forgiveness.

Forgiveness precedes reconciliation and/or restoration (Acts 2:22-41);
however, forgiveness does not always indicate reconciliation and/or
restoration. By forgiving an abuser, a survivor lays aside bitterness, anger, and
malice and they depend on the Lord for justice according to His righteousness
(Eph. 4:31-32; Ps. 72:2). Yet the consequences of an abuser’s sin remain.
When a survivor forgives their oppressor, they do not release the abuser from
accountability in the courts of God or man.

3. How Can a Survivor Forgive Their Abuser?

Burns explains, “We cannot be ready to deal with the ‘relational’ side of
forgiveness until we have come before God and worked through the legal
side.”286 Survivors may struggle to forgive. A great evil has been perpetrated,
and the counselor must acknowledge the horrendous damage. Langberg writes,
“When you push others to ‘just forgive,’ as if somehow it was something that

   283
       Ken Sande, The Peacemaker: A Biblical Guide to Resolving Personal Conflict,
3rd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2004), 207.
   284
       Diane M. Langberg, Counseling Survivors of Sexual Abuse (Wheaton, IL:
Tyndale House Publishers, 1997) 173.
   285
       Bob Burns and Michael J. Brissett, Jr., The Adult Child of Divorce (Nashville,
TN: Oliver-Nelson Books, 1991) 139-140.
   286
       Burns and Brissett, The Adult Child of Divorce, 139-144.
                                        1225
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



could be done quickly or easily, without a consideration of the consequences
of that sin, we have adopted a superficial view of sin.”287 The fact that
forgiveness is necessary is due to the great wickedness that took place.
Recognition of the difficulty is required.

The cross is where survivors taste and see God’s goodness and kindness in His
forgiving work. In the Westminster Larger Catechism discussion of the Lord’s
Prayer, Question 194 asks, “What do we pray for in the fifth petition?” In
answer, the WLC says,

           In the fifth petition, (which is, forgive us our debts, as we
           forgive our debtors,) acknowledging, that we and all others are
           guilty both of original and actual sin, and thereby become
           debtors to the justice of God; and that neither we, nor any
           other creature, can make the least satisfaction for that debt:
           we pray for ourselves and others, that God of his free grace
           would, through the obedience and satisfaction of Christ,
           apprehended and applied by faith, acquit us both from the guilt
           and punishment of sin, accept us in his Beloved; continue his
           favor and grace to us; pardon our daily failings, and fill us
           with peace and joy, in giving us daily more and more
           assurance of forgiveness; which we are the rather emboldened
           to ask, and encouraged to expect, when we have this testimony
           in ourselves, that we from the heart forgive others their
           offenses.

The Holy Spirit works in the heart of a survivor to apply God’s forgiving work
in their own life. As the WLC emphasizes, the ability to forgive others grows
out of an appreciation of God pardoning personal sin. The parable of the
“unforgiving servant” (Matt. 18:32) teaches, in part, that recognizing God’s
forgiveness is an important first step toward forgiving. When a survivor
accepts God’s forgiveness, they position themselves to begin the process of
forgiving.

4. What Is the Goal of Forgiveness?

In a non-abusive relationship, it is right to “rebuke” the offender. Luke 17:3
says, “Pay attention to yourselves! If your brother sins, rebuke him, and if he
repents, forgive him.” Confrontation is meant to bring the offender to


   287
         Langberg, Counseling Survivors, 172.
                                         1226
                                  APPENDIX V



repentance and to restore a damaged relationship with both the Lord and those
offended. Matthew 18:15-20 provides the steps for this process. Greater
pastoral care is required for helping survivors forgive those who have abused
them. Confrontation of an abuser must be understood in the context of Jesus’s
teaching in other passages.288

If genuine repentance has not occurred, it may be unwise to encourage a
survivor to go to their abuser. It may also be unwise to ever encourage a victim
to go to an abuser one-on-one. In Matthew, Jesus teaches that confronting the
unrepentant is like throwing pearls before swine.

         “Do not give dogs what is holy, and do not throw your pearls before
         pigs, lest they trample them underfoot and turn to attack you” (Matt.
         7:6).

Confronting the unrepentant is worthless and may even be dangerous (they
will “trample them underfoot”). Jesus also says the offender may “turn to
attack you,” so the survivor may suffer further trauma at the hands of the
abuser.

Beach writes, “It is sometimes argued that forgiveness coupled with
repentance clears the way for all or most of the debris caused by the sin or sins
in question and full reconciliation (most of the time) is the requisite step to
follow. . .”289 Forgiveness and reconciliation are not the same. This simplistic
view of the destruction caused by abuse will often result in further abuse and
manipulation.

Scripture is clear: the offending party, not the offended, is responsible for
repentance (Luke 17:3). The abuser is responsible to turn from their abuse.
Repentance and a renewed relationship with the Lord are the goal. Scripture is
also clear regarding reconciliation; it is “conditional” on true repentance (Luke
17:3, Col. 1:21-23). Repentance that is obvious, genuine, and demonstrable
over time is necessary for restoration.




   288
      See also Section Six: The Misuse of Spiritual Authority in this report.
   289
       J. Mark Beach, “Forgiving like God?: Some Reflections on the Idea of
Conditional Forgiveness,” Mid-America Journal of Theology 26 (2015): 151-96.


                                      1227
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



When counseling a survivor of abuse, the process of forgiveness must be
handled pastorally. Recognizing the extensive damage done to the target of
abuse will encourage the counselor to patiently prepare the survivor to forgive.

Because of the damage the abuser caused in the relationship, repentance must
be evident and long-lasting for trust to be re-established. Counselors should
allow survivors to set the pace for reconciliation, having multiple witnesses to
significant evidence of a changed heart that has not only put off sinful
behavior, but has also been renewed in the mind and put on the opposite, God-
glorifying behaviors (Eph. 4:28).




                                     1228
                                 APPENDIX V




                               Attachment 10

Repentance

For restored trust and/or the possibility of reconciliation in any broken
relationship, an abuser must clearly exhibit genuine repentance over an
extended period of time. The following is a summary list of the signs of
repentance. This list is not guaranteed. Abusers, by their very nature,
manipulate and control in order to manage their image. Abusers are skillful
and adept at what they do. Discernment is advised.

1. Ownership of sin without minimization
The victim is not responsible for the abuse [see Myths of Abuse in Attachment
7]. The abuser must fully own their sinful actions and choices.

2. Willingness to fully accept the consequences for sin
Many abusers will be quick to confess sin (minimally) in order to appear
repentant. If more is required of them, they tend to protest. Worldly repentance
is resistant to accepting consequences. A changed heart will exhibit a
willingness to take full responsibility.

3. Patient endurance with the victim’s healing
Genuinely repentant persons allow their victims the necessary time to process
what happened and heal.

4. Godly repentance recognizes the difference between being forgiven,
    being trusted, and/or being restored.
The repentant person will not expect to be rewarded with a victim’s
forgiveness, trust, or reconciliation for doing as God commands. Godly
behavior is expected and not necessarily rewarded. (See Attachment 9:
Forgiveness for further discussion on trust and reconciliation.)

5. Commitment to stop the abuse and recognize the damage it has caused
    for the family
A full confession of sin, including specificity regarding the abuse, along with
accountability is required. A third party is recommended.




                                     1229
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Exegesis of 2 Corinthians 7 on the nature of repentance290

        For the sorrow that is according to the will of God produces a
        repentance without regret, leading to salvation, but the sorrow
        of the world produces death. For behold what earnestness this
        very thing, this godly sorrow, has produced in you: what
        vindication of yourselves, what indignation, what fear, what
        longing, what zeal, what avenging of wrong! In everything you
        demonstrated yourselves to be innocent in the matter (2 Cor.
        7:10-11).

For the sorrow that is according to the will of God produces a repentance . . .

        1. Without regret, leading to salvation,
           a. Does the abuser regret losing control?
           b. Does the abuser regret the consequences he faces for his sin?
           c. Does the abuser regret the loss of prestige, respect, influence,
           etc.?

        2. For behold what earnestness this very thing,
           a. Is the abuser working diligently to see a change?
           b. Does he faithfully complete all homework?
           c. Is his attitude serious toward changing his life?

        3. This godly sorrow,
           a. Does he consistently express sadness for the harm he has done
           to others?
           b. When reminded of his sin, does the abuser apologize or
               complain about his sin being “brought up” again?
           c. Is his sorrow focused on the harm his actions did to others or
               on the hardship they brought to him?

        4. What vindication of yourselves,
           a. Does the abuser so repent as to promote restitution for his
           actions?
           b. Does the abuser now oppose control within himself and others
               with zeal and passion?



   290
       Rev. Vincent Wood, Providence Presbyterian Church (PCA), York,
Pennsylvania.
                                     1230
                         APPENDIX V



    c. Are the actions of the abuser establishing a new life pattern in
       which an accusation of abuse would seem impossible? (For
       restoration of a minister, BCO 34-8 requires that it only be
       done when the sentiment of the church “demands it.”)

5. What indignation,
   a. Does the abuser hate what they have done?
   b. Is the abuser “beating himself up” for the sins he committed?
      This indignation will fuel earnest repentance.

6. What fear,
   a. Is the abuser terrified that they will abuse again? An alcoholic
      once told me, “I know that I have another drunk in me. I am
      terrified that I might not have another sober.” This “fear” kept
      him sober.

7. What longing,
   a. Does the abuser look to the future with hope?
   b. Does the abuser imagine what it will be like to be trustworthy
   and safe?

8. What zeal,
   a. Is repentance the driving factor in the abuser’s life?
   b. Is the abuser ever aware of his propensity to control and is he
      committed to “take every thought captive to the obedience of
      Christ?”

9. What avenging of wrong!
   a. Is the abuser willing to make up for his wrongs to the very
   people he hurt?
   b. Does the abuser recognize why his victims do not want to be
      around him? Does he willingly honor this desire?




                             1231
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                Attachment 11

Divorce and Domestic Abuse

1. Introduction

For Christians, perhaps the most controversial topic involving domestic abuse
is the subject of divorce. The Westminster Confession of Faith states that
adultery and desertion are the only biblical grounds for the dissolution of a
marriage.291 Yet some argue that desertion functions as an umbrella category
encompassing several ways that a person can abandon his/her spouse. Carl
Trueman succinctly summarizes this position when he says that the essence of
desertion is a dereliction of duty, rather than an abandonment of space.292 In
other words, desertion is about more than geography. This view is shared by
the Report of the Ad-Interim Committee on Divorce and Remarriage from the
20th General Assembly of the PCA. It argues that domestic abuse is a form of
desertion because the abuser’s violence creates a forced separation between
spouses that is equivalent to abandonment.293 Our report affirms this position
and defends it with biblical and practical arguments.

2. The Biblical Argument

As we examine Scripture, it is important to also examine our own assumptions.
In theological inquiry, the answer we produce can be greatly influenced by the
way we frame the question. Therefore, this section not only studies Scripture,
but also identifies and challenges one of the key assumptions we bring to the
interpretive task, especially concerning biblical grounds for divorce.

That assumption has to do with what we expect the Bible to say. Some pastors
limit the grounds for divorce to the specific situations mentioned in Scripture,
which are sexual immorality and an unbeliever deserting a believer. Doubtless
this position is motivated by sincere desires to protect the covenant of marriage
and faithfully obey God’s Word. But it contains an assumption that usually


   291
       Westminster Confession of Faith (Suwanee, GA: Great Commission
Publications, 1978–2005), 24.6.
   292
       Carl Trueman and Todd Pruitt, “What Is the Church to Do?” Mortification of
Spin Podcast, https://www.reformation21.org/mos/podcast/21100.
   293
       Minutes 20th General Assembly, 519-520, 562-563. Also see the section on
“unjust divorce, or desertion” in the Biblical and Confessional Foundations for
Understanding Abuse section in our report.
                                       1232
                                  APPENDIX V



goes unidentified and unchallenged: why would we expect the Bible to list all
of the situations in which divorce is permissible? The answer is because we
are interpreting Scripture through the lens of modern law, instead of ancient
law.

In determining biblical grounds for divorce, we are operating in the theological
category of the law of God. That is, we are asking what the law of God allows
and does not allow in regard to ending a marriage. But if we interpret Scripture
through the lens of modern law, we will most likely arrive at a very different
answer than if we read it as law from the Ancient Near East.294 Most modern
societies use exhaustive law codes. Every practice a society wishes to regulate
must be listed in a separate law. As a result, when we investigate the issue of
divorce, we assume the Bible will explicitly mention every situation in which
the practice is allowed. But ancient law did not work this way. The Ancient
Near East used case law, which gives rules that govern a specific situation.
From that specific case, we are expected to deduce a general principle that we
can apply to other situations. In keeping with its Ancient Near Eastern context,
the Pentateuch is filled with case law. Old Testament scholar Douglas Stuart
writes, “. . . the Israelites had to learn to see the underlying principles in any
law and not let the specifics of the individual [situation] mislead them into
applying the law too narrowly.”295 This is why it is best to view desertion as
an umbrella category that encompasses multiple ways that a person can
abandon their spouse. The Report of the Ad-Interim Committee on Divorce
and Remarriage states:

         Further, taking into account both the general principles of Biblical
         ethics and the Scripture’s characteristic manner of ethical instruction,
         viz. the statement of commandments in a general form to which is
         added case law sufficient to indicate the manner of application, it
         seems to us that those Reformed authorities are correct who have
         argued that sins which are tantamount in extremity and consequence
         to actual desertion should be understood to produce similar
         eventualities.296

With the proper understanding of how biblical law functions, it is important to
apply this framework to the apostle Paul’s teaching on desertion and divorce
in 1 Corinthians 7:15. Paul writes, “But if the unbelieving partner separates,

   294
      The difference is explained in Douglas K. Stuart, Exodus, vol. 2, New
American Commentary (Nashville, TN: Broadman & Holman, 2006), 442-445.
  295
      Ibid., 443.
  296
      M20GA, 562-563.
                                      1233
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



let it be so. In such cases the brother or sister is not enslaved. God has called
you to peace.” In this verse, Paul permits a believer to divorce his/her
unbelieving spouse if the unbeliever abandons the marriage. An accurate
interpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:15 depends on its literary context and the
entire chapter’s flow of thought. In v. 1 Paul writes, “Now concerning the
matters about which you wrote . . .” Everything Paul says about marriage,
divorce, and remarriage in 1 Corinthians 7 is in response to specific questions
posed by the Corinthians in a previous letter. He spends the entire chapter
answering questions about marriage regarding different groups of people
within the Corinthian church. The following is a brief outline of the questions
Paul addresses:

        •    vv. 1-7 – To those considering a renunciation of marriage: remain
             married with full conjugal rights.
        •    vv. 8-9 – To the unmarried and widows: it is good to remain
             unmarried, but those who cannot exercise self-control should
             marry.
        •    vv. 10-11 – To the married (both partners are believers): remain
             married, but if you divorce you must remain single or be
             reconciled to your spouse.
        •    vv. 12-16 – To the married (one partner is an unbeliever): remain
             married unless the unbelieving partner separates.
        •    vv. 17-24 – The general principle: remain as you are.
        •    vv. 25-38 – To the betrothed: it is good to remain unmarried, but
             if you marry you have not sinned.
        •    vv. 39-40 – General precepts for the married and widowed.297

In a New Testament epistle, the subjects an author addresses are largely
determined by the situation in the receiving church. This means that Paul did
not write a treatise on divorce and list all of the biblical grounds. Rather, Paul
received a letter from the Corinthians asking about several situations in their
church. He answers those questions in 1 Corinthians 7. The reason Paul
addresses an unbeliever deserting a believer is because the Corinthians had
asked him about mixed marriages. Therefore, it is entirely appropriate to ask,
“Why did Paul allow divorce in this specific situation? And using that same
reasoning, might there be other situations in which divorce is permitted?”



   297
       Adapted from Gordon D. Fee, The First Epistle to the Corinthians (Grand
Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1987), 268.
                                       1234
                                   APPENDIX V



Another reason we should ask these questions is because of the nature of
ancient case law. As a former Pharisee, Paul was steeped in the Pentateuch.
When he thought of ethical issues, case law was in the front of his mind. This
means that when Paul gives a command governing a specific situation, such as
a Christian being deserted by an unbelieving spouse, we should try to discern
the universal principle behind his command.

The principle behind 1 Corinthians 7:15 is that believers are not allowed to
actively seek a divorce from their spouses, but if one spouse effectively deserts
his/her marriage responsibilities, the other spouse is not obligated to remain
married. Based on the Greek grammar, the key element in Paul’s line of
reasoning is the passivity of the believing spouse in the action that instigates
divorce. In this verse Paul makes a pronounced switch from the active voice
to the passive. In the original Greek, verse 15a literally reads, “But if the
unbeliever separates, be separated.”298 Paul uses a middle indicative form of
χωρίζω (separates), immediately followed by a passive imperative form of the
same verb (be separated). He uses the same verb twice in a row, but the second
time the verb is passive. Paul’s point is that a believer is not allowed to actively
instigate divorce. But when one spouse effectively abandons the marriage, the
other spouse can let the separation take place.

This interpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:15 is strengthened by research from
Wayne Grudem, who recently changed his position on this issue. Grudem
focuses on the phrase “in such cases” (Greek: ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις). This phrase
is not used anywhere else in the New Testament or the Septuagint. But Grudem
studies the use of this phrase in extra-biblical Greek literature, including Philo,
Lysias, and Euripedes. He concludes that the phrase “in such cases” refers to
a broader category of situations other than the example given. According to
Grudem, the use of the phrase in 1 Corinthians 7:15 means, “in this and other
similarly destructive situations (that is, situations that destroy a marriage as
much as adultery or desertion).”299 Such a definition fits perfectly within the
framework of case law discussed above.

Some pastors and elders maintain that desertion is only grounds for divorce if
the deserting spouse is an unbeliever. However, while a mixed marriage is a

   298
        To avoid redundancy, the ESV translates v. 15a, “But if the unbelieving
partner separates, let it be so.”
    299
        Wayne Grudem, “Grounds for Divorce: Why I Now Believe There Are More
Than Two,” The Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood,
https://cbmw.org/2020/06/10/grounds-for-divorce-why-i-now-believe-there-are-
more-than-two/.
                                       1235
                       MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



circumstance of the case, it is not the determining factor in Paul’s permission
to dissolve the marriage. The determining factor is the act of abandonment. In
the above discussion of case law, Douglas Stuart warned against allowing the
specifics of the individual case to lead us into applying the law too narrowly.
We fall into this trap if we require an abandoned person to be married to an
unbeliever in order to qualify for divorce.

In view of these considerations, domestic abuse clearly qualifies as an act of
desertion. It creates an oppressive environment in the home that often forces
the victim to leave for her own safety and well-being. A man who abuses his
wife or children has abandoned his role as a husband and father and has
therefore broken the marriage covenant. The Report of the Ad-Interim
Committee on Divorce and Remarriage shares this position:

          This is so precisely because his violence separates them, either by her
          forced withdrawal from the home or by the profound cleavage
          between them which the violence produces, as surely as would his own
          departure, and is thus an expression of his unwillingness “to consent”
          to live with her in marriage (1 Cor. 7:12-13; Eph. 5:28-29).300

When a victim of abuse must leave her home to protect herself and her
children, it is the perpetrator’s abusive actions that have caused the separation,
not the victim’s decision to leave. The same can be said of a victim’s choice
to file for divorce. Taking such a step does not violate Paul’s prohibition
against actively instigating the dissolution of a marriage. Her spouse is the one
who has broken the marriage covenant through his abuse, and she is merely
seeking the formal recognition of a state of brokenness that already exists. A
victim’s decision to divorce does not kill the marriage. Abuse kills the
marriage, and divorce is merely seeking the death certificate.

3. The Practical Argument

The purpose of this section is to build on the biblical argument that abuse
breaks the marriage covenant. By bringing to light the oppressive effects of
abuse on the victim and her children, this section will strengthen the case that
domestic abuse creates a forced separation in the marriage that is tantamount
to desertion. An abusive marriage damages the physical and psychological
health of the victim and forces her to leave the abuser to pursue healing and



   300
         M20GA, 563.
                                       1236
                                   APPENDIX V



safety. The following are just some of the ways that domestic abuse can impact
the victim:

        •    Severe anxiety
        •    Panic attacks
        •    Questioning her own sanity
        •    Intense nightmares
        •    Insomnia
        •    Digestion problems
        •    Depression
        •    PTSD
        •    Suicidal ideation
        •    Physical injuries
        •    Life threatened (in the most severe cases).301

It is common to think that only physical abuse would be an adequate reason to
leave. It is possible to infer this from the above quote from the Report of the
Ad-Interim Committee on Divorce and Remarriage, due to its repeated use of
the word “violence.” Yet such a position severely underestimates the effects
of all types of abuse on the victim. All abuse results in the physical symptoms
listed above. Emotional, verbal, and spiritual abuse often cause the victim to
experience panic attacks, depression, PTSD, and suicidal thoughts, all
concurrently. Even in physically abusive relationships, the greatest damage the
victim suffers is almost always psychological. Physical damage can heal in a
matter of days or weeks, but psychological wounds take years to overcome. In
fact, it is common for victims who have experienced both psychological and
physical abuse to say that psychological abuse is worse. All types of abuse are
absolutely devastating to a victim’s health and well-being. All types of abuse
create a forced separation in the marriage, just like physical abuse. And
therefore, all types of abuse qualify as a form of desertion.

It is also important to consider the sexual dimension of marriage. In many
cases, abuse does not stop when the couple enters the bedroom. There are
many abusive men who have never hit their wives but have sexually violated
them in ways that are degrading and inhumane. Examples include:

        •    Forcing her to watch pornography under the threat of violence
        •    Rape

  301
      For a more complete list see Christiane Sanderson, Counseling Survivors of
Domestic Abuse (Philadelphia, PA: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2008), 54-55.
                                       1237
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         •   Forced sodomy
         •   Requiring her to engage in sexual acts with other men, also under
             the threat of violence.

Victims of sexual abuse are on high alert the moment their husbands climb
into bed and suffer from intense nightmares and insomnia as a result. Yet the
sexual dimension of an abusive marriage is so humiliating that many victims
will not disclose it even if they are asked, especially to male pastors and elders.
Limiting biblical grounds for divorce to physical abuse fails to account for this
destructive yet secretive aspect of the marriage.

Another factor is the impact of domestic abuse on children. Living in an
abusive home scars children, even if the abuse is not perpetrated directly
against them. Children who grow up in a family where dad abuses mom
experience many of the following effects:

         •   Failure to thrive in infants
         •   Fear
         •   Anxiety
         •   Insecurity
         •   Self-blame
         •   Defiance
         •   Poor grades
         •   Bed-wetting in children over four
         •   Intense nightmares
         •   Eating disorders
         •   Substance abuse
         •   Teen pregnancy
         •   Cutting
         •   Suicidal thoughts
         •   Boys are more likely to become abusive
         •   Girls are more likely to marry abusive men.302

It is common for pastors and elders to pressure victims of abuse to remain in
their marriages, and one of the primary motives is the impact of divorce on
children. This is a mistake. While divorce is always unfortunate, and the effect


   302
      For a more complete list see Lundy Bancroft, When Dad Hurts Mom: Helping
Your Children Heal the Wounds of Witnessing Abuse (New York, NY: Penguin,
2004), 72-74.
                                       1238
                                     APPENDIX V



on children is undeniable, the impact of domestic abuse on children is worse
than the impact of divorce.303

Another reality we have to grapple with is that abusers rarely change.304 Unless
you are a victim of domestic abuse or an expert in the field, you do not fully
appreciate the depth of blindness and self-deception that plagues abusive men.
It is something you have to experience to fully grasp. This blindness and self-
deception make the change process much more challenging than other types
of sanctification. We can trust in the power of the Holy Spirit to transform the
human heart, but that should not cause us to ignore the fact that counseling
programs for abusive men have low success rates. One rigorous study of
batterer intervention programs found only a five percent improvement rate in




   303
        Brenda Branson and Paula J. Silva, Violence Among Us: Ministering to
Families in Crisis (Valley Forge, PA: Judson Press, 2007), 44.
    304
        “‘Keep on hearing, but do not understand; keep on seeing, but do not perceive.’
Make the heart of this people dull, and their ears heavy, and blind their eyes; lest they
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and turn
and be healed” (Isaiah 6:9–10). G.K. Beale writes, “Whenever the organs of spiritual
perception were seen to be not functioning, a certain kind of language was used. We
might call this sensory-organ-malfunction language. When this language is used in the
Old Testament, almost without exception, it refers not just to sinners in general but to
only one particular kind of sin—the sin of idol worship” (G.K. Beale, We Become
What We Worship, A Biblical Theology of Idolatry (Downers Grove, IL: IVP
Academic, 2008), 41). Isaiah is speaking to this specific type of sin. He later tells us
God Himself “smeared over their eyes so that they cannot see and their hearts so that
they cannot comprehend” (Isa. 44:8, emphasis mine). At its root, abuse in marriage is
the sin of self-worship. “An abusive person uses his God-like faculties to overpower
those same faculties in someone else to get what he wants. Instead of using his powers
to arrange the world to God’s glory, he uses his powers to arrange the world for his
own” (Jeremy Pierre, Greg Wilson, When Home Hurts, A Guide for Responding
Wisely to Domestic Abuse in Your Church (Geanies House, Fearn, Ross-shire,
Scotland: Christian Focus Publications, 2021), 24). God does not share His glory with
another, and the judgment for such sin, for those who worship any other, is to be “made
spiritually insensitive like the idols they worship.” Beale, Worship, 47. Beale
continues, “the reversal of spiritual blindness and deafness into spiritual ‘seeing and
hearing’ is the gift of God and cannot occur by any independent human determination”
(Ibid, 270). Only God can reverse this condition. While those contributing to this
report believe God can and will change anyone, these passages emphasize both the
difficulty and the utter dependence on God that pastors, leaders, and counselors must
acknowledge when shepherding those who abuse.
                                          1239
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



perpetrators ceasing physical abuse.305 Couples counseling and anger
management fared even worse.306 Therefore, asking a victim to remain married
could be tantamount to asking her to endure a lifetime of abuse. If Scripture
permits victims of abuse to divorce, as this report argues, then pastors and
sessions should not deny what Scripture allows. They should humbly and
compassionately shepherd a victim towards an abuse-free life, be it through
the abuser’s repentance and the restoration of her marriage or the ending of her
marriage.

Protecting the marriage covenant is a biblical desire, but so is protecting a
human being. As people created in the image of God, victims of abuse and
their children have inherent value and dignity that should be protected. Pastors
and elders who pressure victims to remain in abusive marriages usually do not
fully comprehend the damage abuse inflicts on a human being. When
ministering to families impacted by domestic abuse, the physical and
psychological safety of the victim and her children should take priority over
keeping the marriage together.

4. The Question of Remarriage

If a victim of domestic abuse divorces her husband, is she allowed to remarry?
Deuteronomy 24:1-4 assumes that divorced people can remarry, and Jesus
permits remarriage if the divorce was for sexual immorality (Matt. 19:9). Some
strengthen the case for remarriage after desertion by appealing to the second
half of 1 Corinthians 7:15, which reads, “But if the unbelieving partner
separates, let it be so. In such cases the brother or sister is not enslaved. God
has called you to peace.” When Paul writes that “the brother or sister is not
enslaved,” many understand him to be saying that the believer is not enslaved
to the previous marriage and is therefore free to remarry.307 This interpretation
is often referred to as the “Pauline privilege.” We agree that Paul is saying that
a deserted spouse is not enslaved to the previous marriage, but it is doubtful
that Paul addresses remarriage. He goes on to write, “God has called you to
peace. For how do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or
how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?” Paul’s point is
that the deserting spouse’s lack of salvation does not obligate the believer to

   305
        National Institute of Justice, Practical Implications of Current Domestic
Violence Research: For Law Enforcement, Prosecutors and Judges (Washington DC:
U.S. Department of Justice, 2009), 65.
   306
       Ibid., 66.
   307
       For example, see M20GA, 561-562, and John Murray, Divorce (Philadelphia,
PA: P&R, 1961), 74-75.
                                      1240
                                   APPENDIX V



stay in the marriage for the sake of evangelism. Doing so produces a state of
perpetual marital conflict, which is the antithesis of the peace and
reconciliation that characterizes the gospel. The believing spouse is not
enslaved in that they are free to divorce. However, the freedom to remarry is
simply not addressed.308

Nevertheless, the language of not being “enslaved” should hold special
significance for victims of abuse. As unfortunate as divorce is, the Lord does
not require them to remain in the oppression that they have suffered. The God
who led His people out of slavery in Egypt (Ex. 20:2), and the Savior who
came to liberate the oppressed (Luke 4:18), now tells victims of abuse that they
are no longer enslaved (1 Cor. 7:15). Throughout Scripture, the Redeemer of
the oppressed bids His people to run free.

Although 1 Corinthians 7:15 does not speak to remarriage, there is another
passage in the same chapter that does address the issue. We read in vv. 10-11,
“To the married I give this charge (not I, but the Lord): the wife should not
separate from her husband (but if she does, she should remain unmarried or
else be reconciled to her husband), and the husband should not divorce his
wife.” Some theologians think these verses prohibit remarriage after divorce
in all circumstances.309 They argue that Paul is issuing a strict, over-arching
command which applies to all Christians in all situations. There are two factors
which make this interpretation unlikely.

First, we must understand the cultural context of first century Corinth, which
had a view of marriage and divorce that fell far short of the biblical standard.
Anthony Thiselton writes, “In the Roman world of the first century divorce
was undertaken both frequently and often for selfish, trivial reasons.”310 We
face a similar situation in our culture today. The difference is that in ancient
Corinth, the Christian view of marriage would not have been seen as
traditionalist dogma, but as a strange and unrealistic novelty. In light of the
audience Paul is addressing, it is best to view vv. 10-11 as a general statement
against the prevailing cultural attitude toward divorce. In general, Christians
may not divorce their spouses at will. Those who do so are not allowed to
remarry.

   308
       Fee, The First Epistle to the Corinthians, 303.
   309
       Gordon J. Wenham and William E. Heth, Jesus and Divorce, Updated Edition
(Carlisle, CA: Paternoster Press, 1984), 144 and Fee, The First Epistle to the
Corinthians, 296.
   310
      Anthony C. Thiselton, The First Epistle to the Corinthians, New International
Greek Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2000), 540.
                                       1241
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




Second, the Greek construction ἐὰν δὲ καὶ (translated “but if”) introduces a
general condition that qualifies the preceding prohibition.311 Despite the fact
that Paul has prohibited divorce, he acknowledges the practice will
nevertheless continue, and so he regulates it. Paul has given a general
command not to divorce your spouse. If someone disobeys this command, that
person is not allowed to remarry. But if the divorce is for biblical grounds, that
person has not disobeyed God, as v. 15 clearly shows. In other words, Paul
only prohibits remarriage for people who have divorced their spouses on
unbiblical grounds. In light of the fact that remarriage is assumed in
Deuteronomy 24:1-4 and allowed in Matthew 19:9, it is safe to conclude that
people who divorce on biblical grounds are free to remarry. This includes
victims of abuse.

Some pastors and Sessions are in the practice of advising victims to remain
permanently separated from the abuser, but to refrain from divorce. Such an
option may seem like the best of both worlds: the marriage covenant is
preserved, and the victim is safe. However, this course of action is not
recommended. If the victim has no intention of ever living with the abuser as
husband and wife, one should question if they are truly married. They may be
married on paper, but they are functionally divorced. This is certainly how the
apostle Paul would view such a situation, as there was no category of legal
separation in the first century. A couple was either married or divorced; there
was no middle ground. Furthermore, without a divorce the victim is not able
to remarry. Many victims are in their 20s or 30s when they leave their abusive
spouses. It is tragic to rob them of the freedom to remarry when Scripture
allows it, especially at such a young age.

Those who argue against remarriage usually believe that the marriage bond is
indissoluble, except by death. As appealing as such a view may be, it is hard
to square with Deuteronomy 24:1-4 and Matthew 19:9. Scripture teaches that
marriage is a covenant (Prov. 2:17; Mal. 2:14). This means that it is a binding
relationship that should ideally never be broken. But despite this ideal, it can
be broken. Geerhardus Vos illustrates:

         We may have on our parlor table a beautiful and costly vase. It ought
         to be handled carefully. It ought not to be broken. It was not made to
         be smashed; it was made to exist as a thing of beauty and grace. But it

   311
      Walter Bauer, et al., A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and other
Early Christian Literature, Third Edition (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
2000), 267 and Fee, The First Epistle to the Corinthians, 295.
                                       1242
                                     APPENDIX V



       is not impossible to break it. And if a member of the family breaks it
       through carelessness, or in a fit of temper smashes it deliberately, there
       is nothing to do but sweep up the broken fragments and dispose of
       them. We will not say, “This vase was not intended to be broken;
       therefore it is impossible to break it; the vase is unbreakable; therefore
       in spite of the fact that it lies in shattered fragments on the floor, we
       will not throw it away; we will keep it forever.” No one would say that
       about a broken vase; yet that is substantially the argument of those
       who say that the marriage bond is “indissoluble” and “unbreakable.”312
5. Conclusion

In the experience of the authors of this report, most Christian victims of abuse
are deeply committed to their marriages. In fact, it would be difficult to find a
group of people who have paid a higher price for their commitment to the
marriage covenant. Many victims have courageously stayed with their spouses
for years and continued exposing themselves to abuse in hopes that their
marriages would be saved. They do not want to smash the beautiful and costly
vase that Geerhardus Vos describes. Rather, they are sitting on the floor
surrounded by shattered fragments, desperately trying to put the pieces back
together, hopeless and confused as to why nothing they try seems to work.
Sometimes God will perform a miracle and bring healing and restoration to the
marriage. But many times, He does not, and in such cases, victims should not
be forced to endure a lifetime of abuse. God has declared that they are no
longer enslaved. He declares this because of who He is: the God of the exodus;
the God of redemption. If we in the PCA want to respond to oppression the
way God does, we will support victims of domestic abuse on their difficult
journey to freedom.




   312
         Quoted in Loraine Boettner, Divorce (Nutley, NJ: P&R, 1960), 13.
                                         1243
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                               Attachment 12

Committee Bios

Committee Members

REV. DR. TIMOTHY R. LECROY [Chairman] is a teaching elder in
Missouri Presbytery. He is a visiting instructor of historical theology at
Covenant Theological Seminary and has served the General Assembly on
various committees. Dr. LeCroy brings the perspective of an abuse survivor to
the committee.

DR. KELLY DEHNERT [Secretary] is a ruling elder in Rocky Mountain
Presbytery and Assistant to the Pastor at Covenant Presbyterian Church in
Lander, WY. He researches and teaches on abusive leadership in Christian
organizations and is on the national board of Refuge Ministries.

REV. CAL BOROUGHS is a retired teaching elder in Tennessee Valley
Presbytery, formerly pastor of St. Elmo Presbyterian Church in Chattanooga,
TN. He has served as moderator for his Presbytery and was part of the working
group that brought to the Assembly the overture for a study committee on
domestic abuse and sexual assault.

MR. BOB GOUDZWAARD is a ruling elder in Central Carolina Presbytery
and helped develop a domestic abuse online training video for the Institute for
Biblical Counseling and Discipleship. He serves as director of Care Ministries
at Christ Covenant Church in Charlotte, NC.

DR. DAVID HABURCHAK is a ruling elder in Metro Atlanta Presbytery
and a doctor of internal medicine with extensive experience in the effects of
childhood abuse on adults. Dr. Haburchak is Emeritus Professor of Medicine
at the Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University. He recently authored
“Kingdom Work: Redeeming Child Sexual Abuse.”

REV. DR. LLOYD PIERSON is a teaching elder in Rocky Mountain
Presbytery and works with abuse survivors and perpetrators through Refuge
Ministries, a national domestic abuse ministry founded in Kalispell, MT. He
is the senior pastor of Faith Covenant PCA in Kalispell.




                                     1244
                                APPENDIX V



REV. SHANE WALDRON is a teaching elder in Rocky Mountain Presbytery
and the lead pastor of Rocky Mountain PCA in Westminster, CO. He founded
and serves on the national board of Refuge Ministries. He also developed the
curriculum the ministry uses.

Advisory Members

RACHAEL DENHOLLANDER became known internationally in 2016 as
the first woman to pursue criminal charges and speak publicly against USA
Gymnastics’ team doctor Larry
Nassar, one of the most prolific sexual abusers in recorded history. She is an
attorney, author, advocate, and educator. Rachael is a member of the Reformed
Baptist Church of Louisville, KY.

ANN MAREE GOUDZWAARD is a member of Christ Covenant PCA in
Matthews, NC and the Executive Director of Help[H]er. In addition, she trains
counselors at RTS Charlotte, Eternity Bible College, and PeaceWorks
University. Ann Maree is a biblical counselor with an M.Div. with a
counseling emphasis and a D.Min. candidate.

DR. DIANE LANGBERG is a member of Calvary PCA in Willow Grove,
PA and is a psychologist with over 50 years of experience helping abuse
victims. She is a well-known speaker and author of multiple books about abuse
and trauma.

DR. BARBARA SHAFFER is a member of Faith PCA in Wilmington, DE
and a psychologist with nearly 40 years of experience, much of which involved
working with survivors of sexual and domestic abuse.

DARBY STRICKLAND is a member of Cornerstone PCA in Center Valley,
PA and on the faculty of Christian Counseling Educational Foundation. She
teaches “Counseling Abusive Marriages” at Westminster Theological
Seminary in Philadelphia. She is the author of the book, Is It Abuse?, and two
booklets for churches and survivors of abuse.




                                    1245
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                    ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY

(Editor’s Note: These resources were current at the time of publication.)

This bibliography is not intended as an exhaustive list but representative of
quality resources from both Christian and non-Christian experts on abuse
recommended by the committee. The following are the reference categories.

1. Adult Sexual Assault / Abuse
2. Batterers / Abusers
3. Childhood Sexual Abuse
4. Childhood Adversity
5. Domestic Violence
6. Healing and Recovery: General
7. Healing and Recovery: Sexual Abuse / Assault
8. Spiritual Abuse / Misuse of Spiritual Authority
9. Websites

1. ADULT SEXUAL ASSAULT / ABUSE

Courtright, John and Sid Rogers. What To Do When You Find Out Your
Wife Was Sexually Abused. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1994.
        Written for husbands whose wives are going through therapy for
sexual abuse. Also helpful for couples to read in that situation. Explains
emotional reactions and offers suggestions about how to talk to each other
constructively.

Hundley, Shelley. A Cry for Justice: Overcome Anger, Reject Bitterness,
and Trust in Jesus Who Will Fight for You. Lake Mary, FL: Charisma
House, 2011.
         Hundley was sexually molested (by pastors) as a child of missionaries
in Columbia. This is a wonderful book, though some will struggle with her
Charismatic doctrine. Her understanding of justice and forgiveness is very
helpful to those who seek healing from sexual abuse.

Langberg, Diane. Counseling Survivors of Sexual Abuse. Camarillo, CA:
Xulon Press; 1st Edition, 2003.
        A pioneering and timeless guide to counseling survivors of sexual
abuse based on the premise that such therapy must be both incarnational and
redemptive. Essential reading for anyone who wants to know how to counsel
a survivor in healing ways that reflect the person of Christ.
                                     1246
                                  APPENDIX V




2. BATTERERS / ABUSERS

Arbinger Institute. Leadership and Self-Deception, Getting Out of the Box.
Oakland, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2000, 2010, 2018.
        Leadership and Self-Deception is not a Christian book, nor even a
conventional secular book. It is written as a hypothetical narrative, a pretend
story about a leader in an imaginary organization. What makes this book
helpful in shepherding abusers is how it accurately, and often biblically,
describes the mind of someone who feels entitled.
        Throughout the descriptions of living inside “the box,” the reader will
hear echoes of Paul’s challenge in Philippians 2:3-8:

        Do nothing from selfish ambition or conceit, but in humility
        count others more significant than yourselves. Let each of you
        look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of
        others. Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in
        Christ Jesus, who, though He was in the form of God, did not
        count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied
        himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the
        likeness of men. And being found in human form, He humbled
        himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death
        on a cross.

         Leadership and Self-Deception shows us that, when we act contrary
to what we are called to do for others, we betray our true self. Living in that
self-betrayal, our view of the world is distorted. Self-betrayal is how we get
ourselves into the box.
         Inside the box, we are self-deceived. We inflate others’ faults while
justifying our own. In the box, other people do not have the same privilege of
thinking, feeling, acting, or wanting as we do. Our thoughts, feelings, desires,
and actions take primacy.
         The authors suggest that to get out of the box, our perspective must
change. Inside the box, the problem is that others need to change. Outside the
box, we cease self-justification, honor other people as people (fellow image-
bearers), and see them as those who have valid thoughts, feelings, and actions.
         Interestingly, the authors also stumble across another biblical principle
as seen below in Chalmers’s resource. That is, simply changing behavior is not
how to get out of the box. Changing behavior while inside the box is simply a
means for more sophisticated ways to blame. “Since the box itself is deeper
than behavior, the way out of the box has to be deeper than behavior too” (142).
                                      1247
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



When we experience others as people rather than objects for our own
satisfaction we live outside the box.

Chalmers, Thomas, D.D. The Expulsive Power of a New Affection.
Minneapolis, MN: Curiosmith, 2012.
        Puritan Thomas Chalmers’s little, but powerful sermon challenges
both the counselor and the believer to understand that “pulling up our
bootstraps,” determining to be better, or even regulating behavior will not
succeed in the Christian life. “It is almost never done by the mere force of
mental determination” (11). The only possible remedy for love (and therefore
obedience) of God is that He replace what is in the seat of our affections. In
abuse, the abuser’s affection is self. Only by “substituting another desire, and
another line of habit of exertion in its place . . .” (11) can the love of “the
world” (a.k.a., “self”) be expunged and “supplanted by the love of that which
is more worthy than itself” (17).
        Counselors and Christians will find Chalmers’s wisdom a helpful
perspective for how to approach caregiving when working with an abuser. See
also Packer, J. I. Knowing God. Downers Grove, IL: IVP, 2021.

Owen, John. Spiritual-Mindedness. Edited by R.J.K. Law. Edinburgh,
UK: The Banner of Truth Trust, 2009, 2016.
         Owen wants believers to be drawn to the awe-inspiring, life-giving,
eternally blessed Father. In fact, in Spiritual-Mindedness, Owens wants our
minds drawn to our Savior and spiritual things every moment. Romans 8:6-8
says, “For to set the mind on the flesh is death, but to set the mind on the Spirit
is life and peace. For the mind that is set on the flesh is hostile to God, for it
does not submit to God’s law; indeed, it cannot. Those who are in the flesh
cannot please God.” Owens writes, “All actions, good or bad, come from our
thoughts” (7) and “That which you set your heart on is that which you will
think about most (238). Owen devotes his entire book to walking us through
how to purposely and helpfully focus—daily and regularly—our thoughts
upon God.
         Similar to Chalmers’s claim in The Expulsive Power, Owen suggests
to think God’s thoughts is to grow to know and love Him more. To think God’s
thoughts, therefore, is to eradicate the sin of self-worship. Counselors and
pastors can help abusive individuals redirect their thoughts toward the only
Source worthy of our praise.




                                       1248
                                  APPENDIX V



Paymar, Michael, and Anne Ganley. Violent No More: Helping Men End
Domestic Abuse, 3rd Ed. Nashville, TN: Hunter House, 2015.
        This book is very helpful for counseling batterers. Despite the lack of
hopefulness for batterers to change, this book challenges the reader to trust that
God can indeed change anyone. It provides many helpful stories of success.
Though not a Christian text, it seeks to get to the heart of the abuser for real
change to happen.

Tozer, A.W. The Knowledge of the Holy. New York, NY: HarperCollins,
1961.
        If knowing who God is and thinking His thoughts after Him is one
way to replace thoughts of self and entitlement, the attributes of God are the
place to begin. Tozer’s classic, The Knowledge of the Holy is a grace that
introduces us (or reminds us) who God is and why who He is matters in our
everyday world. In keeping with spiritual-mindedness, thinking about who
God is on a daily basis is refreshment for the soul: the type of deep soul-
refreshment that shapes our affections. “What comes into our minds when we
think about God is the most important thing about us” (1). Rather than our
wants, our needs, our desires, our passions defining who and what we are
(abusive or not), thoughts about God make us who He intended us to be.

Welch, Edward T. When People Are Big and God Is Small: Overcoming
Peer Pressure, Codependency, and the Fear of Man. Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R
Publishing, 1997.
         “Fear of man is such a part of our human fabric that we should check
for a pulse if someone denies it” (17). Everyone, it seems, struggles to fear
God more than we fear fellow man. Fear of man keeps a victim of abuse
paralyzed; everything they do revolves around pleasing their abuser. Fear of
man keeps abusers relentlessly pursuing, obtaining, and keeping the image
they’ve created intact.
         Fear of man is a significant characteristic of abuse, both of the victims
and the abusers. At the heart of this fear is unbelief of a good God. Fear of man
fills the vacuum when a holy fear of God is lacking. Only God provides all
things necessary for life and godliness. Only God’s love is the answer to the
human struggle. All attempts to find satisfaction, or approval, or recognition
outside of pursuing God’s love, forgiveness and acceptance will fail. Only a
radical fear of God will replace the fear of man. See also Flavel, John.
Triumphing over Sinful Fear. Grand Rapids, MI: Reformation Heritage Books,
2011 and Fox, Christina. A Holy Fear, Trading Lesser Fears for the Fear of
the Lord. Grand Rapids, MI: Reformation Heritage Books, 2020.


                                      1249
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



3. CHILDHOOD SEXUAL ABUSE

Allender, Dan. The Wounded Heart: Hope for Adult Victims of Childhood
Sexual Abuse. Colorado Springs, CO: Navpress, 2008.
        For those who have experienced childhood sexual abuse and those
who love and care for them, The Wounded Heart offers a tender,
compassionate window into the psychological effects of abuse and the
theological foundations for healing.

Denhollander, Rachel. What Is a Girl Worth? Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale
Momentum, 2019.
         A compelling personal account of sexual abuse at the hands of a
trusted physician and the courageous path the author took to expose a powerful
figure and a powerful organization in the face of disbelief and efforts to silence
her. Saturated with deep faith, biblical support, forgiveness, and a relentless
desire to protect other children.

Haburchak, MD, David R. Kingdom Work: Redeeming Childhood Sexual
Abuse. Research Triangle, NC: Lulu Publishing, 2019.
         Intended as a comprehensive primer on all aspects of the subject from
both theological and medical points of view, it is specifically designed for
churches to use in small group study with prayer, discussion points, and
applications. Recommendation for a child safety policy is in Attachment 6, and
it outlines current self-help as well as church-based treatment programs by
Mary Demuth and the BECOMERS ministry to both victims and perpetrators
by Lynn Heitritter and Jeanette Vought. Haburchak is a Ruling Elder in the
PCA.

Langberg, Diane. Counseling Survivors of Sexual Abuse. Camarillo, CA:
Xulon Press; 1st Edition, 2003.
        A pioneering and timeless guide to counseling survivors of sexual
abuse based on the premise that such therapy must be both incarnational and
redemptive. Essential reading for anyone who wants to know how to counsel
a survivor in healing ways that reflect the person of Christ.

Langberg, Diane. On the Threshold of Hope: Opening the Door to Healing
for Survivors of Sexual Abuse. Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale House, 1999.
        A companion to Counseling Survivors of Sexual Abuse that will lead
survivors along the path of understanding and healing.



                                      1250
                                  APPENDIX V



McConnell, Mez. The Creaking on the Stairs. Fearn, Ross-shire. UK:
Christian Focus Publications Ltd., 2019.
         This book was written for those who have suffered from childhood
sexual abuse; however, Mez McConnell maps the truths and promises of God
over all the circumstances of horrific pain and suffering. This book is a helpful
perspective for someone who has endured any kind of abuse. The story in the
book is raw. Please recommend reading with caution.

4. CHILDHOOD ADVERSITY

Jung, J.H. “Childhood Adversity, Religion, and Change in Mental
Health.” Research on Aging no. 40 (2018): 155-79.
         Author contends that “religious practice and spirituality buffer the
noxious effects of abuse on positive affect (“calm, peaceful, cheerful, happy,
satisfied, good spirits”) but do not help the downward spiral of negative affect,
especially in later times of stress (“hopeless, nervous, restless, sadness,
worthlessness, nothing could cheer you up”).” He seems to suggest that church
and spirituality provide existential hope to maintain some degree of optimism,
but reluctance to talk to others, especially in the congregation about their
experiences leads to the persistence of strong negative cognition, especially
under times of stress. This would fit with the BECOMERS group’s strategy
noted above and has implications for how churches handle the past trauma of
members.

5. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

Bancroft, Lundy. When Dad Hurts Mom: Helping Your Children Heal the
Wounds of Witnessing Abuse. New York, NY: Hudson, 2004.
        Written for mothers who are struggling with how to protect their
children from the emotional trauma they experience after witnessing physical
and/or emotional abuse in their homes and from the manipulation of the
abusive parent. Contains many helpful and practical suggestions.

Bancroft, Lundy. Why Does He Do That?: Inside the Minds of Angry and
Controlling Men. New York, NY: Berkley Books, 2002.
         Bancroft is extremely helpful in understanding the minds of abusers.
He was an early batterers’ intervention support group leader. His current focus
is on helping the justice system work together to battle domestic violence and
give targets safety. This book has helped countless women over the years. He
provides a thorough approach to increasing understanding why some men


                                      1251
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



abuse women, including early warning signs, ten abusive personality types,
the process of change, and more.
        For a comprehensive understanding of an abusive man, Bancroft’s
book is essential. While insight from his sociology is important, the reader
should know he has no biblical understanding of anthropology or sin, nor does
he recommend any biblical solutions. Caution is advised due to foul language
and utter lack of hope found throughout the book.

Branson, Brenda and Paula Silva. Violence Among Us: Ministry to
Families in Crisis. Valley Forge, PA: Judson Press, 2007.
         This book offers practical help in identifying abusive situations. It has
strategic counseling tips, case studies and models of effective ministry to both
the victim and the perpetrator. There are resource lists which include domestic
violence hotlines and shelters, faith-based organizations, abuser treatment
programs, and information on legal and safety issues.

Evans, Patricia. The Verbally Abusive Relationship: How to Recognize It
and How to Respond, 3rd ed. Avon, MA: Adams Media, 2010.
        Very helpful in identifying verbal abuse and emphasizes specific
themes that are helpful for those in abusive relationships. Excellent advice on
how to respond to verbal abuse. Not written by a Christian.

Hambrick, Brad. Church Cares | Becoming a Church That Cares Well for
the Abused. https://churchcares.com/.
         This is an exceptional resource for churches who desire to care “Well
for the Abused.” Hambrick has put together notable experts in the Christian
community to speak from various disciplines. From counseling to law
enforcement to advocacy, Becoming a Church That Cares Well provides video
training and a free e-book from the website for use by Sessions for the
instruction of their congregations.

Herman, Judith. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence – from
Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. New York, NY: Basic Books, 1997.
        An insightful, groundbreaking book for those who want to understand
the impact of trauma and the prerequisites for recovery.

Holcomb, Lindsey A., Justin S. Holcomb, and Elyse M. Fitzpatrick. Is It
My Fault?: Hope and Healing for Those Suffering Domestic Violence, New
edition. Chicago: Moody Publishers, 2014.



                                      1252
                                 APPENDIX V



        Written tenderly to victims, this book speaks the gospel of grace into
their hearts and situations while helping them to consider steps they can take
towards healing.

 Miles, Al. Domestic Violence: What Every Pastor Needs to Know. 2nd ed.
Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2011.
         Miles provides many helpful insights to caring for survivors of
domestic violence within the church. Written to church leaders. (Some pastors
will struggle with his quoting of women church leaders.)

Millage, Sydney. Sanctuary: Hope and Help for Victims of Domestic Abuse.
Bemidji, MN: Focus Publishing, 2018.
        Sydney Millage suggests that the way to effectively minister to abuse
victims is an understanding of domestic abuse and how to apply the good news
of Jesus, His Word, and character to what has remained unseen, unknown, and
misunderstood. The author “provides comprehensive hope and help for
victims of domestic abuse, counselors and friends who come alongside them,
and churches striving to shepherd members righteously and compassionately.”

Moles, Chris. The Heart of Domestic Abuse: Gospel Solutions for Men Who
Use Control and Violence in the Home. Bemidji, MN: Focus Publishing,
2015.
        A brilliant book by a pastor, biblical counselor, and batterer
intervention specialist on how to bring oppressors in the church to repentance.

Pierre, Jeremy and Greg Wilson. When Home Hurts, A Guide for
Responding Wisely to Domestic Abuse in Your Church. Fearn, Ross-shire,
Scotland: Christian Focus Publications, 2021.
        Pierre, the Professor of the Biblical Counseling & Department Chair
at the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, and Wilson, a licensed
professional counselor, have written the manual for pastors and church leaders
who want to carefully, wisely, and theologically shepherd victims and
domestic abusers well. The first part of the book addresses the biblical,
theological framework for thinking about this issue, while the second part
proposes the wisest practices for helping those involved.
        The authors acknowledge that the Bible was not written to be a
textbook for abuse. However, Scripture does provide a framework for thinking
through this kind of oppression. The doctrines of Image of God, Sin, Love,
Oppression, Marriage, and the Church all provide an interpretive grid for
helping us understand and respond well in cases of domestic abuse. The


                                     1253
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



authors also helpfully articulate what constitutes normal sin in the marital
relationship versus what constitutes abuse (“me before you” rather than “me
OVER you” p. 70). Every church leader would benefit from this book.

Simon, PhD, George K. Character Disturbance: The Phenomenon of Our
Age, 1st Edition. Little Rock, AR: Parkhurst Brothers Publishers Inc.,
2011.
         Dr. George Simon, a Christian psychologist, describes individuals
with “disturbed characters” as shameless and guiltless. His analysis of abusive
individuals involves various DSM defined disorders but concludes that abuse
is different from suffering from a personality disorder.

Snyder, Rachel Louise. No Visible Bruises: What We Don’t Know About
Domestic Violence Can Kill Us. Bloomsbury Publishing; 1st Edition, 2019.
         A comprehensive, well-researched report on domestic abuse in
America. Snyder’s book has been called a “tour de force” for understanding
domestic violence in American culture. One of the things she helps the reader
understand is that we need to be asking better questions. It’s not enough to ask,
“Why doesn’t she just leave?” At the same time, we must examine why men
feel they have permission to resort to violence as a solution to their (perceived)
problems. “The Danger Assessment” is a particularly helpful tool.

Strickland, Darby A. Domestic Abuse: For the Sufferer. Phillipsburg, NJ:
P&R Publishing, 2018.
         This mini-book, written to the survivor of abuse, provides clarity and
encouragement. It aims to help victims see that God speaks into their situation,
and it offers them steps they can take to begin to get help.

Strickland, Darby A. Domestic Abuse: Recognize, Respond, Rescue.
Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2018.
        This mini-book summarizes how to detect abuse, explains the heart of
an oppressor, and describes first steps to take to help oppressors and the
oppressed. It is a short read and is written with church leadership in mind.

Strickland, Darby A. Is it Abuse? A Biblical Guide to Identifying Domestic
Abuse and Helping Victims. Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2020.
        From beginning to end, a treasure chest of information about the
dynamics and kinds of abuse, their effects on women and children, and
practical steps to take to offer apt help. Strickland teaches how to identify the
toxic entitlement that drives abusive behavior and to better understand its
impact on victims—including children who are raised in a home with domestic
                                      1254
                                 APPENDIX V



abuse. Scripture references and appendices about safety plans, red flags during
dating, pre-marital abuse inventory, ten ways to educate the church, and more.
         It will equip you to provide wise and Christ-centered counsel,
empower, and advocate for victims while navigating the complex dynamics of
oppression in a marriage. The book has detailed inventory questions to screen
for different kinds of abuse—physical, sexual, emotional, spiritual, and
financial—as well as case studies, exercises, and comprehensive worksheets.
Included is a safety action plan that can be used to train helpers and assist
victims.

Tucker, Ruth. Black and White Bible, Black and Blue Wife: My Story of
Finding Hope After Domestic Abuse. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2016.
        A story of abuse from her pastor-husband, as well as other women’s
experiences, and, refreshingly, accounts of husbands who loved their wives as
Christ loved the church. Suggests a biblical approach for challenging abuse
and presses the church to consider thoughtfully the potential danger in
doctrinaire male headship.

Vernick, Leslie. The Emotionally Destructive Marriage: How to Find Your
Voice and Reclaim Your Hope, 2013 Edition. Colorado Springs, CO:
WaterBrook, 2013.
         Based on decades of counseling experience, Vernick’s intensely
practical, biblical advice helps show victims of abuse how to establish
boundaries and break free from emotional abuse. Distinguishes between a
disappointing marriage and a destructive marriage and shines a bright light on
subtle and blatant emotional abuses and their damage. Biblically-based
throughout. Outlines a process that begins within the victim to develop inner
spiritual and relational strengths, moves to trying to initiate change in the
situation, and then moves to dealing constructively when there is no change.
Vernick has helpful online resources and support groups for survivors as well.

6. HEALING / RECOVERY: GENERAL

Card, Michael. A Sacred Sorrow: Reaching Out to God in the Lost
Language of Lament (Quiet Times for the Heart). Colorado Springs, CO:
NavPress, 2005.
        Not written specifically for abuse survivors but helpful for recovery.
God desires for us to pour out our hearts to Him, whether in joy or pain. But
many of us don’t feel right expressing our anger, frustration, and sadness in
prayer. From Job to David to Christ, men and women of the Bible understood
the importance of pouring one’s heart out to the Father. Examine their stories
                                     1255
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



and expand your definition of worship. See also Vroegop, Mark, and Joni
Eareckson Tada. Dark Clouds, Deep Mercy: Discovering the Grace of Lament.
Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway, 2019.

Chalmers, DD, Thomas. The Expulsive Power of a New Affection.
Minneapolis, MN: Curiosmith, 2012.
         Puritan Thomas Chalmers’s little but powerful sermon challenges
both the counselor and the believer to understand that simply “pulling up our
bootstraps,” determining to be better, or even regulating behavior will not
succeed in the Christian life. “It is almost never done by the mere force of
mental determination” (11). The only possible remedy is love (and therefore
obedience) of God in that He replaces what is in the seat of our affections. In
abuse, the abuser’s affection is self. Only by “substituting another desire, and
another line of habit of exertion in its place . . .” (11) can the love of “the
world” (a.k.a., “self”) be expunged and “supplanted by the love of that which
is more worthy than itself” (17).
         The power of this new affection is a “mighty instrument of obedience”
(19). The man (or woman) who has been told to “shut out the world from his
heart,” (26) will find it an impossible task unless they find God as his or her
“sure and satisfying portion” (26).
         Counselors and Christians will find Chalmers’s wisdom a helpful
perspective for how to approach caregiving when working with an abuser. See
also, Ortlund, Dane C. Gentle and Lowly: The Heart of Christ for Sinners and
Sufferers. Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway, 2020 and Packer, J. I. Knowing God.
Downers Grove, IL: IVP, 2021.

Currid, John. Why Do I Suffer?: Suffering & the Sovereignty of God.
Fearn, Ross-shire, UK: Christian Focus, 2014.
        Why does God allow suffering? John Currid helpfully explains how
God works in suffering, not as “a worried observer unwilling or unable to
intervene,” but rather with a purpose.

Fitzpatrick, Elyse M. Because He Loves Me: How Christ Transforms Our
Daily Life. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2010.
         Abuse diminishes the image of God in the victim. Abuse muddies the
waters of identity, and instead of living as children of God, victims forget who
they are as individuals, hyper focus on their weaknesses, and lose who they
are in relationship to their heavenly Father.
         Fitzpatrick expands on these thoughts, calling what many of us
experience as “spiritual amnesia.” For a victim, to restore a God-given identity,
similar to what is mentioned by Chalmers in his resource above, is to turn their
                                      1256
                                  APPENDIX V



eyes fully onto the gift and grace of God’s love. Gospel-shaped living means
the truth of God’s love informs everyday life; it means the believer
is transformed by applying that truth to all the circumstances of life. For a
victim of abuse, this kind of love is foreign. Elyse‘s book challenges the reader
to be who they are. If a victim heard (frequently) the love of their Father, how
might that change their everyday world?

Fitzpatrick, Elyse and Eric Schumacher. Worthy: Celebrating the Value of
Women. Bloomington, MN: Bethany House Publishers, 2020.
        Women who have suffered from abuse may not recognize that women
were always very important to God. Women have always been important as
God works out His redemptive goals. Fitzpatrick and Schumacher take the
reader on a walk through the Bible and demonstrate the many ways God used
women in His plans, encouraged them, and promoted them as valuable human
image-bearers.
        For those who have been diminished simply because of their gender,
Worthy encourages them to see through God’s eyes, to know God’s
acceptance, and to hear God’s call for their life. One of the most important
characteristics of hope a victim can rely on is that God will use everything for
good. The Christian hope in suffering is that God never wastes the difficult
circumstances of our lives. Schumacher and Fitzpatrick illustrate this
beautifully from the Scriptures, encouraging women to persevere, encouraging
them to believe that their story will be redeemed.

Forrest, Joy. Called to Peace: A Survivor’s Guide to Finding Peace and
Healing After Domestic Abuse. Raleigh, NC: Blue Ink Press, LLC, 2018.
        This book is both an autobiography and also a guide for victims of
domestic abuse. With knowledge and compassion, Joy points her readers to
Christ—the ultimate source of true wholeness and healing. Her story is one of
physical abuse and will resonate with victims.
See also, Forrest, Joy. Called to Peace: Companion Workbook. Raleigh, NC:
Blue Ink Press, LLC, 2019.

Gingrich, H.D. and F.C. Gingrich. Treating Trauma in Christian
Counseling. Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2017.
        Heather Gingrich, one of the authors, teaches a course on trauma at
RTS Jackson. The third chapter, “The Neurobiology of Stress and Trauma,” is
worth the price of the book. The authors meticulously walk the reader through
the central nervous system as it relates to the devastating impacts of trauma.
On a positive note, the authors tell us that the brain can change. It isn’t easy,


                                      1257
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



but God has designed it perfectly and it is possible to improve what has been
devastated by trauma.

Herman, Judith. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence—from
Domestic Abuse to Political Terror, New York: Basic Books, 1997.
        An insightful, groundbreaking book for those who want to understand
the impact of trauma and the prerequisites for recovery.

Holcomb, Lindsey. Rid of My Disgrace: Hope and Healing for Victims of
Sexual Assault. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2011.
         Scripturally- and theologically-based view of sexual assault and
restoration by a counselor of sexual assault survivors. Discusses the
psychological, emotional, and spiritual impact of sexual assault. Clearly offers
the hope found in Christ and His redemptive suffering.

Kellemen, Bob. God’s Healing for Life’s Losses, How to Find Hope When
You’re Hurting. Winona Lake, IN: BMH Books, 2010.
         One of the most helpful things pastors and counselors can do to help
victims heal is to encourage them to grieve their losses. All suffering is loss.
“Suffering is so dreadful because suffering is death. All suffering is the dying,
separating, and severing of relationships” (11). Naming those losses, feeling
the pain of losing relationship, identity, and position due to trauma and/or
abuse, is a step toward wholeness. Those who suffer great loss do not
necessarily stop grieving with the passage of time, rather they remember
what’s been lost—feel the feels of the loss—and use those emotions to lead
them to God. Kellemen’s process (albeit not a formula) is so much more
helpful than the five steps developed by Elisabeth Kübler-Ross.

Langberg, Diane. Suffering and the Heart of God: How Trauma Destroys
and Christ Restores. 1st edition. Greensboro, NC: New Growth Press,
2015.
         Langberg says the church’s greatest mission field in the 21st century
is trauma. Trauma is extraordinary, she says, “not because it rarely happens,
but because it swallows up and destroys normal human ways of living.” We,
the church, Langberg says, must become representatives of God to suffering
people.
         Chapters on the psychology of suffering, shame and trauma, domestic
violence, sexual abuse and more call the church to view these evils as part of
the sufferings of Christ and to face them in fellowship with Him, bringing His
restorative power to those who suffer.


                                      1258
                                 APPENDIX V



Owen, John. Spiritual-Mindedness. Edited by R.J.K. Law. Edinburgh,
UK: The Banner of Truth Trust, 2009, 2016.
         Owen, similar to Chalmers, wants believers to be drawn to the awe-
inspiring, life-giving, eternally blessed Father. In fact, in Spiritual-
Mindedness, Owens wants our minds drawn to our Savior and spiritual things
every moment. Romans 8:6-8 says, “For to set the mind on the flesh is death,
but to set the mind on the Spirit is life and peace. For the mind that is set on
the flesh is hostile to God, for it does not submit to God’s law; indeed, it
cannot. Those who are in the flesh cannot please God.” Owens writes, “All
actions, good or bad, come from our thoughts” (7) and “That which you set
your heart on is that which you will think about most (238). Owen’s devotes
his entire book to walking us through how to purposely and helpfully focus—
daily and regularly—our thoughts upon God.
         Like Chalmers’s claim in The Expulsive Power, to think God’s
thoughts is to grow to know and love Him more. To think God’s thoughts,
therefore, is to eradicate the sin of self-worship. Counselors and pastors can
help abusive individuals redirect their thoughts toward the only Source worthy
of our praise.

Schmutzer, Andrew. Naming Our Abuse: God’s Pathway to Healing for
Male Sexual Abuse Survivors. Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel Publications,
2016.
        Extraordinary among books related to childhood sexual abuse (CSA),
this book is written by three men who are survivors of CSA. Using the analogy
of an auto accident and its after-effects, the author unfolds a 4-stage process
of moving carefully towards healing.

Tozer, A.W. The Knowledge of the Holy. New York, NY: HarperCollins,
1961.
        If knowing who God is and thinking His thoughts after Him is one
way to replace thoughts of self and entitlement, the attributes of God are the
place to begin. Tozer’s classic, The Knowledge of the Holy is a grace that
introduces us (or reminds us) who God is and why who He is matters in our
everyday world. In keeping with spiritual-mindedness, thinking about who
God is on a daily basis is refreshment for the soul; the type of deep soul
refreshment that shapes our affections. “What comes into our minds when we
think about God is the most important thing about us” (1). Rather than our
wants, our needs, our desires, our passions defining who and what we are
(abusive or not), thoughts about God make us who He intended us to be.



                                     1259
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Van der Kolk, MD, Bessel. The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and
Body in the Healing of Trauma. 1st ed. New York: Penguin Books, 2014.
        Dr. Bessel van der Kolk, one of the world’s foremost experts on
trauma, has spent over three decades working with survivors. In The Body
Keeps the Score, he explains how trauma reshapes the body and brain. Many
abuse survivors have found this text very helpful though it is somewhat
technically written. Van der Kolk gives a variety of treatment possibilities for
trauma in the final chapters. Not a Christian text.

Welch, Edward T. When People Are Big and God Is Small, Overcoming
Peer Pressure, Codependency, and the Fear of Man. Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R
Publishing, 1997.
         “Fear of man is such a part of our human fabric that we should check
for a pulse if someone denies it” (17). Everyone, it seems, struggles to fear
God more than we fear fellow man. Fear of man keeps a victim of abuse
paralyzed; everything they do revolves around pleasing their abuser. Fear of
man keeps abusers relentlessly pursuing, obtaining, and keeping the image
they’ve created intact. Fear of man is a significant characteristic of abuse: both
of the victims and the abusers.
         At the heart of this fear is unbelief of a good God. Fear of man fills
the vacuum when a holy fear of God is lacking. Only God provides all things
necessary for life and godliness. Only God’s love is the answer to the human
struggle. All attempts to find satisfaction, or approval, or recognition outside
of pursuing God’s love, forgiveness and acceptance will fail. Only a radical
fear of God will replace the fear of man. See also Flavel, John. Triumphing
over Sinful Fear. Grand Rapids, MI: Reformation Heritage Books, 2011 and
Fox, Christina. A Holy Fear: Trading Lesser Fears for the Fear of the Lord.
Grand Rapids, MI: Reformation Heritage Books, 2020.

7. HEALING AND RECOVERY: SEXUAL ASSAULT / ABUSE

Langberg, Diane. Counseling Survivors of Sexual Abuse. First Edition.
Camarillo, CA: Xulon Press, 2003.
        A pioneering and timeless guide to counseling survivors of sexual
abuse based on the premise that such therapy must be both incarnational and
redemptive. Essential reading for anyone who wants to know how to counsel
a survivor in healing ways that reflect the person of Christ.




                                      1260
                                 APPENDIX V



Schmutzer, Andrew. The Long Journey Home: Understanding and Ministering
to the Sexually Abused. Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock Publishers, 2011.
        The Long Journey Home is a rich resource for pastors, therapists,
educators, survivors. Over 24 psychologists, theologians, and pastoral care
professionals (including Dr. Mark Yarhouse and Dr. Diane Langberg) write
from a Christian perspective to cover topics like the nature and dynamics of
sexual abuse, its pervasive impact, approaches to growth and healing. Pertinent
research and resources are noted.

Van der Kolk, MD, Bessel. The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and
Body in the Healing of Trauma. 1st ed. New York: Penguin Books, 2014.
        Dr. Bessel van der Kolk, one of the world’s foremost experts on
trauma, has spent over three decades working with survivors. In The Body
Keeps the Score, he explains how trauma reshapes the body and brain. Many
abuse survivors have found this text very helpful though it is somewhat
technically written. Van der Kolk gives a variety of treatment possibilities for
trauma in the final chapters. Not a Christian text.

8.   SPIRITUAL ABUSE / MISUSE OF SPIRITUAL AUTHORITY

Chapman, Gary, Paul E. White, and Harold Myra. Rising Above a Toxic
Workplace: Taking Care of Yourself in an Unhealthy Environment.
Chicago: Northfield Publishing, 2014.
         White’s book is very readable and practical for those suffering under
an abusive leader. From identifying a toxic boss to leaving the organization
and seeking healing, White is helpful in providing specific examples and
biblical responses to these abusers.

Chrnalogar, Mary Alice. Twisted Scriptures: Breaking Free from Churches
That Abuse, Revised. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2010.
        Chrnalogar analyzes the various ways spiritual abusers twist the
Scriptures to control and manipulate others. Her handling of the nuances of
scriptural guidance on authority and submission is enlightening.

DeGroat, Chuck. When Narcissism Comes to Church, Healing Your
Community from Emotional and Spiritual Abuse. Downers Grove, IL: IVP
Publishing, 2020.
        Since the prevalence of narcissism (think back to Christopher Lasch's
1979 book The Culture of Narcissism) would suggest that narcissism is easily
acquired but not so easily remedied, pastors who lead and who speak with
authority and who wield power in the church should take special note of this
                                     1261
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



book by Chuck DeGroat. This is a cautionary tale from a professional
counselor who has experience with many narcissists in the church. It is a
needed warning since narcissists are capable of inflicting great pain in the
pulpit and in the congregation.

Enroth, Ronald M. Churches That Abuse. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan,
1993.
        Ronald M. Enroth is a leading scholar and national resource on cults
and cultism. Enroth provides helpful guidance in determining the nuances of
Christian teaching that is manipulative and autocratic.

Johnson, David and Jeff VanVonderen, “The Subtle Power of Spiritual
Abuse: Recognizing and Escaping Spiritual Authority within the
Church.” African Ecclesial Review 35, no. 5, 1993.
         Johnson and VanVonderen say, "Victims of spiritual abuse struggle
with a distorted image of God, relating to spiritual authority, having a hard
time with grace, personal boundaries, personal responsibility, lack of living
skills, hard time admitting the abuse, trust.” The authors give clear guidance
in identifying spiritual abuse and determining whether to stay or leave.

Langberg, Diane. Redeeming Power: Understanding Authority and Abuse
in the Church. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Brazos Press, 2020.
        “Power can be a source of blessing, but when it is abused, untold
damage to the body and name of Christ, often in the name of Christ, is done.”
(3) Langberg is helpful in biblically explaining the dynamics of the use of
power both for good and evil. Dr. Langberg speaks with passion and authority,
having over 50 years of experience as a psychologist working with trauma
victims both in the United States and abroad in war-torn countries.

McKnight, Scot, Laura Barringer, and Tish Harrison Warren. A Church
Called Tov: Forming a Goodness Culture That Resists Abuses of Power and
Promotes Healing. Carol Stream, Illinois: Tyndale Momentum, 2020.
        Laura Barringer attended Willow Creek Church under the pastorate of
Bill Hybels. She heard of his sexual misconduct from the Chicago Tribune and
did not believe it at first until she found out one of her friends was one of
Hybel’s victims. A Church Called Tov can help pastors and elders understand
how a toxic culture can develop and live on in the life of a church community.
Barringer joined her father, Scot McNight, a seminary professor, to write this
book to help our churches be safe from becoming harbors of abuse.



                                    1262
                                  APPENDIX V



Mullen, Wade. Something’s Not Right: Decoding the Hidden Tactics of
Abuse and Freeing Yourself from Its Power. Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale,
2020.
          “God is not a God of confusion but of peace,” and God’s people are
called to peace. (1 Cor. 14:33; Col. 3:15). The opposite of godly peace is
confusion, disorientation, disillusionment, and paralyzing fear. Author,
researcher, and advocate Wade Mullen sums up these feelings as something
that doesn’t feel right. God describes the cause of those feelings as “abuse” (2
Tim. 3:1). As with any abusive system, there are patterns. In an institution, the
patterns emerge as the organization defaults to image management rather than
care-filled shepherding.
         Mullen helpfully identifies the patterns of secrecy and a tribal
environment, flattery that distracts, isolation, intimidation, denial, excuses,
justification, comparison, concessions to lesser sins, minimization, and false
demonstrations of repentance. In learning how to recognize abuse tactics, the
potential victim is equipped to effectively respond in God-glorifying ways and
have nothing to do with the abuser (2 Tim. 3:4; 1 Tim. 6:20; Titus 1:14). In his
debut book, Mullen helpfully provides the language necessary for identifying
and describing sinful behaviors abusers use as a means to harm.

Oakley, Dr. Lisa and Justin Humphreys. Escaping the Maze of Spiritual
Abuse, Creating Healthy Christian Cultures. London, UK: Society for
Promoting Christian Knowledge, 2019.
         The term “spiritual abuse” is widely used across the Christian
community. Oakley and Humphreys seek to define the term and help churches
guard against it. The authors help elders and congregant members recognize
spiritual abuse—to lead in ways that are not controlling and manipulative but
rather vulnerable and humble to and create safe church cultures where God’s
people may be edified.

Simon, George K. In Sheep’s Clothing: Understanding and Dealing with
Manipulative People. 2nd ed.. Little Rock, AR: Parkhurst Brothers
Publishers Inc, 2010.
       Simon writes, “Manipulative people have two goals: to win and to
look good doing it. Often those they abuse are only vaguely aware of what is
happening to them.” Simon’s book is helpful to empower those who have or
may be controlled by abusive people.




                                      1263
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



9. WEBSITES
(Editor’s Note: These websites were correct and current at the time of
publication.)

Called to Peace
https://www.calledtopeace.org/
         Called to Peace Ministries (CTPM) is a nondenominational, nonprofit,
501 (c)(3) ministry dedicated to offering hope and healing to victims of
domestic violence, emotionally destructive relationships, and sexual assault.
Our twofold mission is: 1) to provide practical assistance and counsel to
individuals affected by domestic abuse and 2) to educate organizations and
helpers to better respond to these crises through education and mentoring.
Disclaimer: The primary purpose of CTPM is to provide education and
resources to survivors of domestic abuse and to educate people who desire to
help them.
         Called to Peace is a parachurch organization, and in no way seeks to
be a substitute for the local church. Rather, its stated goal is to come alongside
churches to support them as they seek to support victims of abuse. Although it
is an Evangelical Christian ministry, from time to time they call on people
from many theological backgrounds and professional disciplines to share their
knowledge and experience in working with survivors of domestic abuse,
particularly when they offer specific expertise and solutions for survivors.

Clergy Sexual Misconduct Information and Resources
https://clergysexualmisconduct.com/home
         Adult clergy sexual misconduct (CSM), also known as clergy sexual
abuse (CSA), is any sexualized behavior by a church leader/spiritual leader
toward someone under his/her spiritual care, who by nature is in a position of
less power and authority. CSM is an abuse of power and authority, not an
“affair,” as it cannot be considered mutual consent due to the unequal power
dynamics. When the leader forgoes his ethical obligation to maintain healthy
boundaries between himself and those he is ministering to, the leader is
misusing his power to violate the sacred trust and safety of the victim,
committing a breach of fiduciary duty, and violating professional ethics, often
resulting in a traumatic experience for the victim.
This website exists to help adult victims (aged 18+) of CSM/CSA identify the
abuse they are experiencing and find appropriate help.
         Besides providing help for clergy abuse victims, this website is
designed to provide information to church leaders and members to help them
better understand CSM/CSA, prevent it from occurring, and deal with it


                                      1264
                                 APPENDIX V



appropriately by directing them to relevant resources, organizations, and
ministries.
        Although this website approaches the subject of CSM/CSA from a
Christian perspective, the information provided is useful and applicable to
individuals of any religion and spiritual practice.
        Additionally, leaders and victims can be either men or women.
Information contained in this website applies regardless of gender. Since
studies show that most victims are women and most clergy are men, this
website is written with language reflecting that reality.

Document the Abuse
https://documenttheabuse.com/
          In October of 2007, Stacey Peterson disappeared. Her body has never
been found. Shortly before her disappearance, Stacey told her pastor (Neil
Schori) she provided a false alibi for her husband (Drew Peterson) the night
his first wife disappeared. Stacey told Neil she was afraid Drew’s ex-wife was
dead. As a result of this tragedy, Neil—together with nationally known DA
advocate Susan Murphy-Milano—developed an Evidentiary Abuse Affidavit
which would allow women to document any abuse, orders of protection, and
details of abusive circumstances in their homes. Today, Drew Peterson’s sister
Norma is the Executive Director of documenttheabuse.com. Working together
with Neil, they help victims officially document their abuse and bring
awareness to the devastation of domestic violence.

GRACE
www.netgrace.org
       Empowering Christian communities to recognize, prevent, and
respond to abuse.

Help[H]er
https://www.helpherresources.com/
         The story of Help[H]er began when they asked the question, “How
can we help pastors and church leaders shepherd women well?” The answer
was to help the local church build a team of competent, seasoned women who
would come alongside their pastors to help women in crisis.
         At the core of our mission is the desire to assist the local church as
they navigate how to carefully shepherd women.
         The idea of men and women caregiving partnerships in the local
church grew our Help[H]er vision. Not every church has the resources to
develop a Help[H]er ministry. At the same time, leaders find themselves
swimming in complicated issues.
                                     1265
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        Help[H]er is a 501C3 that offers training, resources, and a directory of
caregivers. Whether the church’s goals include structuring their own
Help[H]er ministry, providing rich materials tailored to supplement one-
another care, or meeting more immediate caregiving needs, our resources help
pastors and leaders further their shepherding ministry to women experiencing
crisis.

Peaceworks
http://www.chrismoles.org/
        Chris Moles is a pastor and biblical counselor who helps churches and
families confront the evil of domestic violence and promote healthy, God-
honoring, relationships. PeaceWorks’ primary focus is to educate the Church
in domestic abuse prevention and intervention through PeaceWorks University
and EQUIP (in cooperation with Leslie Vernick) and to provide periodic
coaching and/or educational resources to abusive men through our Men of
Peace program.

The Refuge
https://refugeministries.com/about/
         Helping survivors of domestic abuse find redemption from
oppression, Refuge Ministries began in 2013 when Pastor Shane Waldron
(PCA) realized that common approaches to marriage conflict were ineffective
in cases of domestic abuse. It all started with a support group for survivors of
domestic abuse called The Refuge with four women in attendance. Within a
year, it expanded into a thriving ministry that now offers a batterer’s
intervention program called Turning Point, and a structured program for
children called Refuge Kids.
         Refuge Ministries is one of the only comprehensive programs in the
nation that offers ministry to abusers, survivors, and their children. There are
chapters in the Rocky Mountain region and the East coast, and it is a 501c3.




                                     1266
                            APPENDIX W

                OVERTURES
   TO THE FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
  OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA
               June 21-24, 2022
OVERTURES REFERRED BY THE 48th GENERAL ASSEMBLY
TO THE OVERTURES COMMITTEE OF THE 49th GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

OVERTURE 2021-19 (48th GA) from Pacific Northwest Presbytery
                                                   (to 49th OC)
     "Amend BCO 38-1 & 42-2 to Allow Appealing a
     Censure in a Case without Process"

        [Editorial Note: This overture was originally submitted to the
        48th General Assembly (2021), which referred it to the 49th
        GA Overtures Committee.]

Be it resolved that BCO 38-1 be amended as follows, affording a person
        the right to appeal a censure after a confession in a case without
        process, instead of just filing a complaint.
Be it also resolved that BCO 42-2 also be amended to correspond with
        the revision of BCO 38-1, and to also include a reference to the
        right of appeal provided in BCO 34-10 regarding divestiture.
        (Strike-through for deletions, underlining for new wording.)

        BCO 38-1.
        When any person shall come forward and make his offense
        known to the court, a full statement of the facts shall be
        recorded, and judgment rendered without process. In
        handling a confession of guilt, it is essential that the person
        intends to confess and permit the court to render judgment
        without process. Statements made by him in the presence
        of the court must not be taken as a basis of a judgment
        without process except by his consent. In the event a
        confession is intended, a full statement of the facts should
        be approved by the accused and by the court, before the
        court proceeds to a judgment. The accused has the right of
        complaint against the judgment. A censured person has the
        right to appeal (BCO 42).
                                    1267
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



          BCO 42-2.
          Only The only parties entitled to an appeal are those who
          have submitted to a regular trial are entitled to an appeal.,
          those appealing a censure in a BCO 38-1 case without
          process, and those appealing a BCO 34-10 divestiture
          without censure

Rationale:
This past year, the SJC received complaints alleging three presbyteries
violated BCO 38-1. Thus, some clarification is warranted.1 These Cases
have resulted in the expenditure of hundreds of manhours.

In addition to this Overture, our Presbytery has filed three others
       pertaining to BCO 38-1, which seek to:

-         clarify procedures for the confession document on which censure
          is based;
-         clarify when a confession can be handled as a case without
          process; and
-         explicitly allow the right to counsel in a case without process.
          Each of these four revisions is needed and BCO 38-1 will be much
          improved if all four are adopted. They’re filed separately so each
          can be considered individually because (a) each is important in
          and of itself and (2) none of them affect, or rest on, the adoption
          of any of the others.

Now, to the explicit rationale for why appeals should be allowed in BCO
   38-1 matters.

1. The BCO allows a person convicted at trial to appeal his censure, so
   it’s fair to give the same right to a person who confessed his offense,
   but seeks higher court review of the censure. An appeal results in
   much quicker adjudication by the higher court(s) because a complaint
   must first be filed with the original court. (Ten of our presbyteries
   only meet twice a year.) And if the complaint is assigned to a

1
    Case 2019-10 TE Evans v. Arizona. SJC sustained the Complaint on 7/20/20
    by a vote of 18-3.
    Case 2019-04 TE Williams v. Chesapeake. SJC sustained the Complaint on
    8/24/20 by a vote of 13-5.
    Cases 2020-07 TE Wilbourne v. Pacific; combined with Case 2020-08 TEs
    Gendall, Hightower, & Lien v. Pacific, and Case 2020-09 REs Ozbolt & Barr
    v. Pacific. (Pending)
                                     1268
                               APPENDIX W



    presbytery commission, it would delay even further the date on which
    the SJC could render a final decision.

2. There’s also an important difference between the remedies available
   to the higher court when it sustains a complaint vs. when it sustains
   an appeal. This alone is a compelling reason why BCO 38-1 should
   be revised to allow an appeal in a case without process.

    Complaint: BCO 43-10. The higher court has power, in its
    discretion, to annul the whole or any part of the action of a lower
    court against which complaint has been made, or to send the
    matter back to the lower court with instructions for a new hearing.
    ... (Emphasis added here and below.)

    Appeal: BCO 42-9. The decision of the higher court may be to
    affirm in whole or in part; to reverse in whole or in part; to render
    the decision that should have been rendered; or to remand the case
    to the lower court for a new trial. In every case a written opinion
    shall be prepared, and a copy of the opinion and judgment entered
    will be delivered personally or mailed to the lower court and the
    appellant, with a written receipt required.

    It would be wiser to allow the higher court to render the decision that
    should have been rendered (as in an appeal) rather than limiting its
    power to annulling or remanding for new hearing. Here is an example.
    This year, three cases came to the SJC from different presbyteries,
    each which essentially alleged that inadmissible evidence or
    statements were presented when the presbyteries were considering
    censure (in addition to the agreed-upon “full statement of the facts”).
    The SJC sustained two, and the third is pending. In such cases, it
    would be wiser and fairer to allow an appeal, so the higher court could
    “render the decision that should have been rendered.”

    It doesn’t seem prudent to “annul” a censure when the person has
    confessed to an offense warranting censure. And it doesn’t seem
    prudent to “send the matter back” when the lower court has probably
    jeopardized the fairness of any future hearing by already having
    received inadmissible evidence. It would be wiser in many instances
    to allow the higher
    court to “render the decision that should have been rendered” by having
    it consider only the confession document, as it was mutually approved
    by the confessor and the lower court.

                                    1269
                   MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



3. Some of the grounds for appeal listed in BCO 42-3 (below) could also
   occur in a BCO 38-1 case.

             BCO 42-3. The grounds of appeal are such as the
             following: any irregularity in the proceedings of
             the lower court; refusal of reasonable indulgence to
             a party on trial; receiving improper or declining to
             receive

             proper evidence; hurrying to a decision before all
             the testimony is taken; manifestation of prejudice
             in the case; and mistake or injustice in the judgment
             and censure. (Emphasis added.)

4. Problems with Multiple Complaints - Unless BCO 38-1 is revised to
   allow an appeal, we could continue to have multiple, simultaneous
   complaints filed against the same censure. It happened twice this
   year. 2 This complicates higher court review in several ways. For
   example, the BCO doesn’t stipulate whose complaint takes
   precedence. If this amendment is adopted, a censured person could
   appeal a BCO 38-1 censure and his appeal would ordinarily be
   considered before any complaint against the same action, per the
   principle in the final clause of BCO 43-1.

            BCO 43-1. ...It is the right of any communing
            member of the Church in good standing to make
            complaint against any action of a court to whose
            jurisdiction he is subject, except that no complaint is
            allowable in a judicial case in which an appeal is
            pending. (Emphasis added.)

5. Suspension of Censure - In appeals, the censure is suspended until the
   higher courts have rendered a decision. But censure isn’t suspended in
   a complaint. For example, if a person is disciplined after improper
   procedures in a BCO 38-1 case, or if the censure is clearly unjust, he can
   presently only file a BCO 43 complaint. And if it is a minister, that
   improper or unjust censure would remain in effect throughout the course
   of presbytery and SJC review of his complaint, which could easily take
   more than a year for a final decision. And even if the SJC eventually

2
    Cases 2019-10 Evans and 2019-12 Pitts, et al, v. Arizona, and
    Cases 2020-07 Wilbourne, 2020-8 Gendall, Hightower, & Lien, and 2020-9
    Ozbolt & Barr v. Pacific.
                                     1270
                               APPENDIX W



    sustained his complaint, the minister would have been disciplinarily
    suspended from office for the entire time, and if so, he would probably
    have lost his job, and his church would probably have needed to call
    another pastor (or at least an interim). 3

    Even if the Overture is adopted and an appeal becomes allowable,
    the original court still has the option of enacting the non-disciplinary
    suspension provided in BCO 42-6:

        BCO 42-6. Notice of appeal shall have the effect of
        suspending the judgment of the lower court until the case
        has been finally decided in the higher court. However, the
        court of original jurisdiction may, for sufficient reasons
        duly recorded, prevent the appellant from approaching the
        Lord’s Table, and if an officer, prevent him from
        exercising some or all his official functions, until the case
        is finally decided (cf. BCO 31-10; 33-4). This shall never
        be done in the way of censure.

6. History - The first sentence of our BCO 38-1 dates back 140 years to
   the PCUS Book of 1879. The other four sentences were added in 2000
   after being proposed the year prior in Overture 11 from Pittsburgh
   Presbytery. That Overture originally proposed the right of “appeal”
   but the 30-member Bills & Overtures Committee amended to
   “complaint.” No grounds were offered in the B&O report, or in the
   Minutes of the 27th GA. (M27GA, Louisville 1999, p. 163 and M28GA,
   Tampa 2000, p. 59) 4

7. Regardless of whether BCO 38-1 is amended to allow appeals, an
   additional clause needs to be added to BCO 42-2 because it doesn’t
   currently reference BCO 34-10, but it should. The second paragraph
   of BCO 34-10 references the right to appeal a divestiture, but BCO
   42-2 unexplainably omits reference to that appeal situation.

        BCO 34-10. Whenever a minister of the Gospel shall
         habitually fail to be engaged in the regular discharge of
         his official functions, ... In such a case, the clerk shall

3
  In SJC Case 2019-04 Williams v. Chesapeake, over 17 months elapsed between
  when the minister filed his complaint to Presbytery against his BCO 38-1
  censure, and when the SJC finally sustained his Complaint. And he was under
  suspended from office the entire time.
4
  It might be significant to note that no SJC members were on the 1999 B&O
  Committee. (M27GA, p. 181)
                                    1271
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



             under the order of the Presbytery forthwith deliver to the
             minister concerned a written note that, at the next stated
             meeting, the question of his being so dealt with is to be
             considered. This notice shall distinctly state the grounds
             for this proceeding. The party thus notified shall be heard
             in his own defense; and if the decision pass against him
             he may appeal, as if he had been tried after the usual
             forms. This principle may apply, with any necessary
             changes, to ruling elders and deacons. (Emphasis added.)

8. If BCO 38-1 is not revised to allow appeal, anyone considering a
   confession — especially a minister — should know that unless he is
   confident of what censure will be imposed (or at least what censure
   will be recommended by the investigative committee, prosecutor, or
   commission), waiving his rights provided in BCO 35-1, 35-3, and 42-
   2 by making a confession could result in a censure that will take effect
   immediately, and remain in effect throughout a very lengthy complaint
   process, because he cannot appeal.

     Additionally, even if he prevails in a complaint before the SJC, the SJC
     can presently only afford him the complaint remedies of BCO 43-10,
     which might include “sending the matter back to the court with
     instructions for a new hearing” – i.e., back to the court which may have
     already presented or heard inadmissible evidence.5

First version adopted and filed by a Commission of Presbytery on
April 8, 2020
Revision adopted and refiled by a Commission of Presbytery on
March 26, 2021
Attested by TE Nathan Chambers, interim stated clerk



5
    In Case 2019-10, Evans v. Arizona, the SJC ruled: "The Complaints are
    sustained, the action of AZP is annulled, and the matter is remanded to AZP for
    further action consistent with this Decision. ... Nothing in this Decision,
    however, affects the underlying matter before AZP with respect to [the
    minister]. AZP could adjudicate the underlying matter as a case without process,
    a case of process, or a case to be dismissed entirely." (Emphasis added.)
    In Case 2019-04, Williams v. Chesapeake, the SJC ruled: “The Complaint is
    sustained and the action of Presbytery approving the [Presbytery Judicial
    Commission] report is annulled, thereby returning the matter to the PJC. The
    PJC is free to dismiss the case, or to adjudicate the case with process according
    to the principles set forth herein.” (Emphasis added.)
                                         1272
                               APPENDIX W



OVERTURE 2021-20 (48th GA) from Pacific Northwest Presbytery
                                                     (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 31-10 and 33-4 on Pre-trial Non-Disciplinary
     Suspensions”

        [Editorial Note: This overture was originally submitted to the
        48th General Assembly (2021), which referred it to the 49th
        GA Overtures Committee.]

Be it resolved that BCO 31-10 and BCO 33-4 be amended by addition, as
        follows (underlining for additional wording):

        BCO 31-10. When a member of a church court is under
        process, all his official functions may be suspended at the
        court’s discretion; but this shall never be done in the way
        of censure, and this requires a three-fourths (3/4) majority.

        BCO 33-4. When it is impracticable immediately to
        commence process against an accused church member, the
        Session may, if it thinks the edification of the Church
        requires it, prevent the accused from approaching the
        Lord’s Table until the charges against him can be
        examined, but this requires a three-fourths (3/4) majority.

Rationale:
1. Indictment only requires a simple majority, but the bar should be
   higher for a court to "administratively" suspend someone from office
   or from the Lord's Table prior to the accused even presenting a
   defense. Granted, the court should retain this option when it is clearly
   warranted, but when it is warranted it should be clear to a three-fourths
   majority. To help ensure that a non-disciplinary suspension from
   office is "never done in the way of censure," it should require a three-
   fourths (3/4) majority.

2. This is particularly important because the BCO does not stipulate a
   deadline for the court to conduct the trial.

3. Furthermore, because it is not possible for a higher/appellate court to
    promptly review whether such a non-censure suspension is actually
    "not done in the way of censure," or whether "the edification of the
    Church requires it," the 3/4 majority will help ensure that a non-
    disciplinary suspension is clearly warranted.
                                   1273
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




4. Ministers – While a Presbytery cannot impose a pre-trial suspension
   from office "in the way of censure," it would certainly feel like a
   censure to a defendant who is a minister, and likely have a similar
   effect. And unless his church can afford to pay him and his temporary
   replacement, the non-disciplinary suspension would almost certainly
   impact his salary and his family's finances (unlike church members or
   elders under similar non-disciplinary suspensions).

5. Below are a few other things for which the BCO requires a three-
   fourths (3/4) Presbytery majority. A pre-trial suspension should also
   be placed in this super-majority category.

        19-16. Where circumstances warrant, a Presbytery may
                approve previous experience which is equivalent
                to internship. This equivalency shall be decided by
                a three-fourths (3/4) vote of Presbytery at any of
                its regular meetings.
        21-4. No Presbytery shall omit any of these parts of trial
                for ordination except in extraordinary cases, and
                then only with three-fourths (3/4) approval of
                Presbytery.
        21-4.a. No Presbytery shall omit any of these [ordination]
                educational requirements except in extraordinary
                cases, and then only with a three-fourths (3/4)
                approval of the Presbytery.
        21-4.c. [An ordination candidate] shall further be required
                to preach a sermon before the Presbytery or
                committee thereof, upon three-fourths (3/4) vote.
        34-8. ...The removal of deposition requires a three-
                fourths (3/4) vote of the court inflicting the
                censure, or a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the court
                to which the majority of the original court
                delegates that authority.

Proposed to the Pacific Northwest Presbytery at its stated meeting on
January 24, 2020
Final version adopted by an Administrative Commission of Presbytery on
April 8, 2020
Attested by /s/ TE Nathan Chambers, interim stated clerk



                                  1274
                                APPENDIX W



OVERTURE 2021-21 (48th GA) from Pacific Northwest Presbytery
                                                    (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 42-6 on Vote Required for Maintaining
     Censure during an Appeal”

        [Editorial Note: This overture was originally submitted to the
        48th General Assembly (2021), which referred it to the 49th
        GA Overtures Committee.]

Be it resolved that BCO 42-6 be amended by addition, as follows
(underlining for addition):

        BCO 42-6. Notice of appeal shall have the effect of
        suspending the judgment of the lower court until the case has
        been finally decided in the higher court. However, the court
        of original jurisdiction may, for sufficient reasons duly
        recorded, prevent the appellant from approaching the Lord’s
        Table, and if an officer, prevent him from exercising some or
        all his official functions, until the case is finally decided (cf.
        BCO 31-10; 33-4). This shall never be done in the way of
        censure, and shall require a two-thirds (2/3) majority.

Rationale:
1. To ensure that "this shall never be done in the way of censure," it
   should require a two-thirds majority.

2. If, for example, a minister's disciplinary suspension is maintained during
   his Appeal of a Presbytery conviction or censure, the process would
   likely take six to nine months to adjudicate through the SJC. And if a
   church member was suspended from the Lord's Supper, his Appeal
   could take a year to be adjudicated by the Presbytery and the SJC.

Proposed to the Pacific Northwest Presbytery at its stated meeting on
January 24, 2020
Final version adopted by an Administrative Commission of Presbytery on
April 8, 2020
Attested by /s/ TE Nathan Chambers, interim stated clerk




                                    1275
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 2021-34 (48th GA] from Pacific Northwest Presbytery
                                                    (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 38-1 re Confession Timing for Case Without
     Process"

       [Editorial Note: This overture was originally submitted to the
       48th General Assembly (2021), which referred it to the 49th
       GA Overtures Committee.]

Be it resolved that BCO 38-1 be amended by adding a second paragraph
        and moving the last sentence of the first paragraph to a third
        paragraph, as follows. (Addition underlined. Moved sentence
        indicated by strike-through and underlining.)

       BCO 38-1
       When any person shall come forward and make his offense
       known to the court, a full statement of the facts shall be
       recorded and judgment rendered without process. In
       handling a confession of guilt, it is essential that the person
       intends to confess and permit the court to render judgment
       without process. Statements made by him in the presence
       of the court must not be taken as a basis of a judgment
       without process except by his consent. In the event a
       confession is intended, a full statement of the facts should
       be approved by the accused, and by the court, before the
       court proceeds to a judgment. The accused has the right of
       complaint against the judgment.
                A person may proffer a confession, and request the
       matter be handled as a case without process, prior to an
       investigation, during an investigation, or after process has
       commenced. If a confession is proffered after the court has
       instituted process (BCO 31-2, second paragraph), the
       prosecutor shall ascertain whether the accused is pleading
       guilty to the charge (BCO 32-3) or is seeking to proceed
       via BCO 38-1. If the latter, and if the prosecutor accepts
       the Confession, he shall suspend process and recommend
       the court approve the Confession. He may also recommend
       a censure. However, if no agreement is reached on the
       Confession, and the matter proceeds as a case of process,
       confession discussions between the prosecutor and the
       accused are not admissible as evidence.
                                   1276
                                APPENDIX W



        The accused person has the right of complaint against the
        judgment.

Rationale:

The revision makes it clearer that the court can accept a confession, and
handle it as a case without process, at different stages – pre-investigation,
during investigation, or even post-indictment. But the court is never
required to handle a confession as a case without process. It always
remains entirely the court’s discretion.

Adopted and filed by a Commission of Presbytery on March 20, 2021
Attested by TE Nathan Chambers, Presbytery Interim Stated Clerk


OVERTURE 2021-35 (48th GA) from Pacific Northwest Presbytery
                                                    (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 38-1 re Counsel for Case Without Process”

        [Editorial Note: This overture was originally submitted to the
        48th General Assembly (2021), which referred it to the 49th
        GA Overtures Committee.]
Be it resolved that BCO 38-1 be amended by the addition of a final
        sentence. (Addition underlined.)
        BCO 38-1.
        When any person shall come forward and make his offense
        known to the court, a full statement of the facts shall be
        recorded and judgment rendered without process. In
        handling a confession of guilt, it is essential that the person
        intends to confess and permit the court to render judgment
        without process. Statements made by him in the presence
        of the court must not be taken as a basis of a judgment
        without process except by his consent. In the event a
        confession is intended, a full statement of the facts should
        be approved by the accused, and by the court, before the
        court proceeds to a judgment. The accused person has the
        right of complaint against the judgment. The person has
        the right to be represented by counsel at any point, in
        accord with the stipulations of BCO 32-19.



                                    1277
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Rationale: In one of the BCO 38-1 Cases this year, a presbytery
commission refused to allow the accused to be accompanied by anyone
during the investigation phase or during the BCO 38-1 discussions.
The presbytery commission contended that the BCO only allows post-
indictment representation (i.e., their interpretation of BCO 32-19).
This revision makes it clear that persons in cases without process also
        have that right.
          32-19. No professional counsel shall be permitted as
          such to appear and plead in cases of process in any
          court; but an accused person may, if he desires it, be
          represented before the Session by any communing
          member of the same particular church, or before any
          other court, by any member of that court. ...” 6
Furthermore, proper requests and objections from competent counsel can
       sometimes help the court avoid mistakes that would otherwise
       result in an appeal or complaint being sustained by the higher
       court.
                                General Note:
If the four separate Overtures on BCO 38-1 from Pacific Northwest are
         adopted (Overtures 19, 33, 34, 35), the BCO 38-1 would be
         revised as follows (Underlining for additions, Strike-through for
         deletions):
38-1. When any person shall come forward and make his offense
       known to the court, a full statement of the facts shall be
       recorded and judgment rendered without process. In
       handling a confession of guilt, it is essential that the person
       intends to confess and permit the court to render judgment
       without process. Statements made by him in the presence
       of the court must not be taken as a basis of a judgment
       without process except by his consent. In the event a
       confession is intended, a full statement of the facts should
       a written Confession (i.e., a sufficient summary of the
       facts, the person’s specific confession, and any expression
       or evidence of repentance) must be approved by the
       accused, and by the court, before the court proceeds to a
       judgment, and the co-signed document shall be appended

6
    Case 2020-07 TE Wilbourne v. Pacific

                                     1278
                                APPENDIX W



        to the minutes (regular or executive session). No other
        information may be presented without written consent
        from the accused and the court, and this prohibition
        includes individuals, prosecutors, committees, and
        commissions. The accused person has the right of
        complaint against the judgment.
        A person may proffer a confession, and request the matter
        be handled as a case without process, prior to an
        investigation, during an investigation, or after process has
        commenced. If a confession is proffered after the court has
        instituted process (BCO 31-2, second paragraph), the
        prosecutor shall ascertain whether the accused is pleading
        guilty to the charge (BCO 32-3) or is seeking to proceed
        via BCO 38-1. If the latter, and if the prosecutor accepts
        the Confession, he shall suspend process and recommend
        the court approve the Confession. He may also recommend
        a censure. However, if no agreement is reached on the
        Confession, and the matter proceeds as a case of process,
        confession discussions between the prosecutor and the
        accused are not admissible as evidence.
        The person has the right to be represented by counsel at
        any point, in accord with the stipulations of BCO 32-19. A
        censured person has the right to appeal (BCO 42).
So that the revised BCO 38-1 would read:
        When any person shall come forward and make his offense
        known to the court, a full statement of the facts shall be
        recorded and judgment rendered without process. In
        handling a confession of guilt, it is essential that the person
        intends to confess and permit the court to render judgment
        without process. Statements made by him in the presence
        of the court must not be taken as a basis of a judgment
        without process except by his consent.
        In the event a confession is intended, a written Confession
        (i.e., a sufficient summary of the facts, the person’s specific
        confession, and any expression or evidence of repentance)
        must be approved by the accused, and by the court, before
        the court proceeds to a judgment, and the co-signed
        document shall be recorded in the minutes. No other
        information may be presented without written consent from
        the accused and the court, and this prohibition includes
        individuals, prosecutors, committees, and commissions.
                                     1279
                     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         A person may proffer a confession, and request the matter
         be handled as a case without process, prior to any
         investigation, during an investigation, or after process has
         commenced. If a confession is offered after the court has
         instituted process (BCO 31-2, second paragraph), the
         prosecutor shall ascertain whether the accused is pleading
         guilty to the charge (BCO 32-3) or is seeking to proceed
         via BCO 38-1. If the latter, and if the prosecutor approves
         the Confession, he shall suspend process and recommend
         the court approve the Confession. He may also recommend
         a censure. However, if no agreement is reached on the
         Confession, and the matter proceeds as a case of process,
         confession discussions between the prosecutor and the
         accused are not admissible as evidence.
         The person has the right to be represented by counsel at
         any point, in accord with the stipulations of BCO 32-19. A
         censured person has the right to appeal (BCO 42).
Conclusion: We believe this Overture’s revision to BCO 38-1, and the
other three proposed by Pacific Northwest Presbytery, will actually
encourage confessions by providing clearer procedures related to them.
And confession is a good thing.7 In addition, better procedures can help
avoid time-consuming, complicated, and often unnecessary judicial
process, along with avoiding many complaints and appeals.8 9
Adopted and filed by a Commission of Presbytery on March 20, 2021.
Attested by TE Nathan Chambers, Presbytery Interim Stated Clerk



7
    e.g., WCF 15:6; 1 John 1:9; James 5:16; Proverbs 28:13
8
    For a discussion of the different timings of confessions (i.e., pre-investigation,
    during investigation, and post-indictment) – and processes for handling them,
    consider one of the Concurring Opinions in Case 2019-10: Evans v. Arizona
    in the SJC’s 2021 Report, and at the link below.
    https://drive.google.com/file/d/10Vi_D1HVNmtvMty-t6HMYK-
    bHfZlD4Qr/view?usp=sharing
9
    For brief summaries of how criminal courts address confessions, see:
    Admissibility of Confessions - www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/3501
    Charge v. Sentence Negotiations - www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/how-
    plea-bargains-get-made.html
    Plea Bargains - www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/plea-
    bargains?utm_source=nolo-
    content&utm_medium=nolo&utm_campaign=nolo-related-products
                                        1280
                               APPENDIX W



OVERTURE 2021-40 (48th GA) from Tennessee Valley Presbytery
                                                    (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 32-13 and 35-5 to Allow Victim Protection
     Provisions"

        [Editorial Note: This overture was originally submitted to the
        48th General Assembly (2021), which “committed” it “to the
        49th GA OC in Birmingham, and in the interim” referred it
        “to the Ad Interim Committee on Abuse…for them to give
        advice to the 49th GA OC.”]

Whereas, when this Overture was filed, it was our understanding these
      proposals were endorsed by the Ad Interim Committee on
      Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault. See the AIC Report for any
      comments.
Whereas, these changes are needed to protect victims of abuse during
      judicial process. As the BCO sections now stand, a victim of abuse
      is given the right to be cross-examined by the accused. That means
      any of the following examples are possible.
           • A teenage girl who was raped by a church staff
                member is cross-examined by the man who raped
                her.
           • Someone who was emotionally and/or physically
                abused is cross-examined by the abuser.
           • A young child who was sexually abused is cross-
                examined by the predator.
      The current provision of cross-examination by the accused in
      these sorts of cases greatly increases the risk of an abused person
      being unwilling to participate in a case of process, and also opens
      the door to further trauma. There is no scriptural mandate for such
      a right of confrontation. The only situation in which such a right
      was invoked was the example of Paul asserting that right as a
      Roman citizen (Acts 25:16).
Whereas, the right afforded the accused to cross-examine his accuser has a
      long history in the Presbyterian Church, dating back to at least 1858.
      This right of confrontation reflects civil law embedded in the 6th
      amendment to the U.S. Constitution, ratified in 1791. The 6th
      amendment grants the accused the right “to be confronted with the
      witnesses against him.” In 1808, Chief Justice John Marshall
      famously stated of the Confrontation Clause: “I know of no principle
      in the preservation of which all are more concerned. I know none, by
                                   1281
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



         undermining which, life, liberty and property, might be more
         endangered. It is therefore incumbent on courts to be watchful of
         every inroad on a principle so truly important.” This opinion
         notwithstanding, it is of note that the Supreme Court has wrestled
         with the right of confrontation and has been willing to recognize the
         need for some protection of some accusers, particularly in cases
         involving minors.

      For example, in Maryland v. Craig (1990), the Court allowed a
      state to utilize a one-way closed circuit television procedure for
      the receipt of testimony by a six-year-old victim in an abuse
      case.10
Whereas, our BCO has not wrestled with the possibility of reasonable
      limits to the right of confrontation. Our ecclesiastic law should
      incorporate reasonable protections for minors and abuse victims,
      while at the same time protecting the rights of the accused to know

10
   In Maryland v. Craig, in a 5-4 decision written by O’Connor, the Court held as
follows: “The Confrontation Clause does not guarantee criminal defendants an
absolute right to a face-to-face meeting with the witnesses against them at trial.
The Clause's central purpose, to ensure the reliability of the evidence against a
defendant by subjecting it to rigorous testing in an adversary proceeding before
the trier of fact, is served by the combined effects of the elements of confrontation:
physical presence, oath, cross-examination, and observation of demeanor by the
trier of fact. Although face-to-face confrontation forms the core of the Clause's
values, it is not an indispensable element of the confrontation right. If it were, the
Clause would abrogate virtually every hearsay exception, a result long rejected as
unintended and too extreme, Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 63. Accordingly, the
Clause must be interpreted in a manner sensitive to its purpose and to the
necessities of trial and the adversary process. See, e.g., Kirby v. United States,
174 U.S. 470. Nonetheless, the right to confront accusatory witnesses may be
satisfied absent a physical, face-to-face confrontation at trial only where denial of
such confrontation is necessary to further an important public policy and only
where the testimony's reliability is otherwise assured. Coy, supra, at 1021. Pp. 5-
11.” https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/89-478.ZS.html
     See also Scalia’s Dissenting Opinion, joined by Brennan, Marshall and
Stevens. In sum, Scalia contended the 6th Amendment to the Constitution would
need to be amended in order for Maryland to do what it did, because the 6 th
Amendment clearly says, “In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy
the right ... to be confronted with the witnesses against him ...”
https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/89-478.ZD.html Scalia’s objection
wasn’t to the fairness issue, but rather, he was sticking to the letter of the law.
This Overture seeks to change the law, so, Scalia’s argument would not apply to
the proposed revision.
                                        1282
                             APPENDIX W



       and “confront” his accuser. In fact, we believe that the Church
       should be more protective of those entrusted to its care than the
       state.
Whereas, as the BCO currently stands, if a church court allowed an
       alleged child-abuse victim to testify by Zoom, the accused might
       have grounds for appeal, alleging the court violated his BCO 32-
       13 right to “examine” all witnesses “in his presence” even if
       defense counsel cross-examined the witness over Zoom.
Whereas, we urge that some accommodation be made for victim
       testimony in cases alleging child abuse, domestic abuse, sexual
       abuse, or sexual assault, to allow the court to make reasonable
       accommodations to shield accusers from face-to-face contact with
       the accused.
Therefore, be it resolved that BCO 32-13, 35-1 and 35-5 be amended by
       adding, to each, the four-sentence paragraphs underlined below.

           BCO 32-13. In order that the trial may be fair and
           impartial, the witnesses shall be examined in the
           presence of the accused, or at least after he shall have
           received due citation to attend. Witnesses may be
           cross-examined by both parties, and any questions
           asked must be pertinent to the issue.
               However, throughout the trial in cases involving
           alleged child abuse, domestic abuse, sexual abuse, or
           sexual assault, a court may make reasonable
           accommodations to shield accusers from face-to-face
           contact with the accused. This can be done upon
           request by the accuser or when the court determines
           that such accommodation is necessary. Such
           accommodations might include procedures such as
           written testimony or videoconferencing testimony, in
           which a reasonable path for cross-examination is
           provided. The court shall include in the record its
           reasons for any accommodations and any objection
           from the accused to such accommodation, and the
           objection and the court’s response shall be included in
           the record.

           BCO 35-1. All persons of proper age and intelligence
           are competent witnesses, except such as do not believe
           in the existence of God, or a future state of rewards

                                  1283
     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



and punishments. The accused party may be allowed,
but shall not be compelled to testify; but the accuser
shall be required to testify, on the demand of the
accused. Either party has the right to challenge a
witness whom he believes to be incompetent, and the
court shall examine and decide upon his competency.
It belongs to the court to judge the degree of credibility
to be attached to all evidence.
     Throughout the trial in cases involving alleged
child abuse, domestic abuse, sexual abuse, or sexual
assault, a court may make reasonable accommodations
to shield accusers from face-to-face contact with the
accused. This can be done upon request by the accuser
or when the court determines that such accommodation
is necessary. Such accommodations might include
procedures such as written testimony or video-
conferencing testimony, in which a reasonable path for
cross-examination is provided. The court shall include
in the record its reasons for any accommodations and
any objection from the accused to such accommodation,
and the objection and the court’s response shall be
included in the record.

BCO 35-5. Witnesses shall be examined first by the
party introducing them; then cross-examined by the
opposite party; after which any member of the court,
or either party, may put additional interrogatories. No
question shall be put or answered except by
permission of the moderator, subject to an appeal to
the court. The court shall not permit questions
frivolous or irrelevant to the charge at issue.
    Throughout the trial in cases involving alleged
child abuse, domestic abuse, sexual abuse, or sexual
assault, a court may make reasonable accommodations
to shield accusers from face-to-face contact with the
accused. This can be done upon request by the accuser
or when the court determines that such accommodation
is necessary. Such accommodations might include
procedures such as written testimony or video-
conferencing testimony, in which a reasonable path for
cross-examination is provided.
The court shall include in the record its reasons for any

                        1284
                                APPENDIX W



            accommodations and any objection from the accused
            to such accommodation, and the objection and the
            court’s response shall be included in the record.

Adopted by Tennessee Valley Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 17, 2021
Attested by /s /TE Jacob A. Bennett, stated clerk


OVERTURE 2021-41 from Tennessee Valley Presbytery (to 49th OC)
     "Amend BCO 35-1 to Expand Potential Witness Eligibility"

        [Editorial Note: This overture was originally submitted to the
        48th General Assembly (2021), which “committed” it “to the
        49th GA OC in Birmingham, and in the interim” referred it
        “to the Ad Interim Committee on Abuse…for them to give
        advice to the 49th GA OC.”]

Whereas, the prosecutor and the accused should have the right to seek to
       call anyone as a witness. Either party may object to any proposed
       witness and the court would rule on the objection. Even if an
       objection is overruled, the court would still need to judge the
       credibility of the witness and his testimony; and
Whereas, to exclude those who do not believe in the existence of God or
       in a future state of rewards and punishments may, in certain cases,
       hamper the prosecutor or the accused in presenting necessary
       evidence, or hamper the interest of justice;
Therefore, be it resolved to strike the first sentence of BCO 35-1 to read
       as follows:

            All persons of proper age and intelligence are
            competent witnesses, except such as do not
            believe in the existence of God, or in a future state
            of rewards and punishments. The accused party
            may be allowed, but shall not be compelled to
            testify; but the accuser shall be required to testify,
            on the demand of the accused. Either party has the
            right to challenge a witness who he believes to be
            incompetent, and the court shall decide upon his
            competency. It belongs to the court to judge the
            credibility to be attached to all evidence.

Adopted by Tennessee Valley Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 17, 2021
Attested by /s/ TE Jacob A. Bennett, stated clerk
                                    1285
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURES SUBMITTED TO THE 49th GENERAL ASSEMBLY

OVERTURE 1 from Palmetto Presbytery                        (to AC)
     “Docket Overtures Committee Report as a GA Order of the Day”

Whereas, the work of the Overtures Committee of the PCA General
       Assembly is acknowledged by all to be one of the most important
       works of the entire General Assembly; and
Whereas, because many churches send their TEs and REs primarily,
       though not exclusively, to vote on overtures brought before the
       General Assembly by the Overtures Committee; and
Whereas, the schedule of the PCA General Assembly is inefficient and
       confusing, leaving the most important work of the Assembly until
       the very end of the Assembly, when commissioners are often tired
       and worn down; and
Whereas, leaving the most important work of the Assembly until the end
       of the schedule causes robust debate on both overtures and
       minority reports to be muted, limited, hampered, and abruptly
       halted; and
Whereas, the Overtures Committee needs the opportunity to reconvene
       during the Assembly to reconsider what will be presented to the
       entire Assembly, and thus should not be too early in the General
       Assembly schedule;
Therefore, be it resolved that Palmetto Presbytery (PCA) overture the
       49th General Assembly to make the report of the Overtures
       Committee regularly the order of the day at 9:00 a.m. on the
       Thursday of each General Assembly.

Adopted by Palmetto Presbytery at its stated meeting, November 11, 2021
Attested by TE Louis Igou Hodges, stated clerk


OVERTURE 2 from the Tennessee Valley Presbytery       (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 22-3 to allow Assistant Pastors to file Complaints
     against Sessions”
     [Added sentence underlined.]

Whereas, assistant pastors are called by a Session and serve as ordained
      elders per BCO 22-3; and
Whereas, as ordained elders, assistant pastors are examined and
      credentialed in the same manner as senior and associate pastors,
                                 1286
                               APPENDIX W



       and in special circumstances can actively serve a Session by
       moderating per BCO 12-4; and
Whereas, complaints are written representations made against some act
       or decision of a court of the Church and assistant pastors are
       theologically trained and credentialed to help Sessions consider
       errors; and
Whereas, there is no clear recourse for assistant pastors to make known
       an error or misjudgment by a Session that they serve, except for
       that Session to be charged by the Presbytery under BCO 40-6;
Therefore, be it resolved to amend BCO 22-3 to read as follows:

        An assistant pastor is called by the Session, by permission
        and approval of Presbytery, under the provisions of BCO
        20-1 and 13-2, with Presbytery membership being
        governed by the same provisions that apply to pastors. He
        is not a member of the Session, but may be appointed on
        special occasion to moderate the Session under the
        provision of BCO 12-4. An assistant pastor, being called
        by a Session, has the right to file a complaint against an
        act or decision of that Session in accordance with BCO
        43.

Adopted by Tennessee Valley Presbytery at its stated meeting on October
19, 2021
Attested by TE Jake Bennett, stated clerk


OVERTURE 3 from Pee Dee Presbytery                         (to IRC)
     “Withdraw from the National Association of Evangelicals”

Whereas the Presbyterian Church in America (PCA) is a member of the
      National Association of Evangelicals (NAE); and
Whereas Chapter 31 of the Westminster Confession of Faith states that
      “Synods and councils are to handle, or conclude nothing, but that
      which is ecclesiastical; and are not to intermeddle with civil
      affairs which concern the commonwealth, unless by way of
      humble petition in cases extraordinary; or, by the way of advice,
      for satisfaction of conscience, if they be thereunto required by the
      civil magistrate;” and
Whereas PCA BCO 3-3 states that, “The sole functions of the Church, as
      a kingdom and government distinct from the civil commonwealth,
                                   1287
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



      are to proclaim, to administer, and to enforce the law of Christ
      revealed in the Scriptures:” and
Whereas the Scriptures clearly teach that Christians should be stewards
      of God’s creation, care for sojourners and aliens, and promote
      matters of civil justice, and members of the PCA may have
      legitimate differences of opinion on the most effective political
      policies to address these matters; and
Whereas the NAE has stated that it intends not only to advocate for
      biblical values and ethics in general, but that “we must advocate
      for political policies:"11 and
Whereas the NAE has frequently intermeddled in civil affairs, by publicly
      pushing for action on the environment,12 immigration,13 and has
      changed its original stance on the death penalty;14 and
Whereas the NAE, in 2018, passed a motion entitled “Fairness for All”15
      which, in advocating for a political compromise regarding sexual
      orientation, gender identity, and religious freedom, goes beyond
      Chapter 31 of the Westminster Confession of Faith; and
Whereas many prominent conservative and evangelical thinkers and
      leaders have denounced this compromise as not leading to
      “fairness” for all who uphold biblical teaching on sexuality and
      marriage, but rather attempts to guarantee religious freedom for
      some organizations and institutions while potentially undermining




11
    National Association of Evangelicals. “For the Health of a Nation: An
Evangelical Call to Civic Responsibility.” NAE.net (https://www.nae.net/wp-
content/uploads/2018/09/For-the-Health-of-theNation_spreads.pdf)
12
    NAE Releases Poverty, Creation Care Document” (https://www.nae.net/nae-releases-
poverty-creation-caredocument/)
13
    “Evangelicals Push For Immigration Reform At Capitol Hill” (https:/
www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/04/29/ evangelicals-immigration-
reform_n_5235516.html)
14
   “The National Association of Evangelicals has changed its position on the deat
h penalty” (https://www.washingtonpost.com/ news/acts-of-
faith/wp/2015/10/19/the-national-association-of-evangelicalshas-changed-its-
position-on-the-death-penalty/)
15
    “Boards back SOGI compromise”
(https://world.wng.org/2018/12/boards_back_sogi_compromise/) “Fairness for
All
Motion” (https://world.wng.org/sites/default/files/assets/NAEBoardResolution_
0.pdf)
                                       1288
                                APPENDIX W



        the pre-political religious freedoms of all Americans codified in
        the 1st Amendment of the U.S. Constitution16, and
 Whereas the NAE claims to speak for the entirety of its membership and
        to be their voice in Washington; and
 Whereas these are only a few of many examples of the NAE’s continuing
        practice of intermeddling in civil affairs; and
 Whereas our sister denomination, the RPCNA, withdrew from the NAE
        in 2009, citing a particular document “Loving God and Neighbor
        Together” that was written and signed by Christians and Muslims
        with the implied premise that our historic faith and Islam worship
        the same God, but in different ways; 17
 Whereas no other NAPARC denominations are members of the NAE; and
 Whereas any individual, local congregation, or presbytery, who feels
        strongly about remaining in the NAE may join at those
        appropriate levels; and
 Whereas the Presbyterian Church in America, as a denomination, has no
        need of the benefits of membership in the NAE, especially of
        having a voice in Washington championing political concerns that
        would not even be permitted as a subject of discussion before its
        councils, let alone be adopted as positions;
Therefore, Pee Dee Presbytery requests that the 49th General Assembly
        take action to withdraw the membership of the PCA from the
        National Association of Evangelicals (NAE) at the soonest
        possible date.

 Adopted by Pee Dee Presbytery at its stated meeting, October 28, 2021
 Attested by TE Michael S. Brown, stated clerk


 OVERTURE 4 – VACATED


 OVERTURE 5 – VACATED



 16
    See, for example, https://www.theaquilareport.com/misguided-proposal-from-
 christian-leaders-and-lgbt-activists-is-anything-but-fairness-for-all/,
 https://albertmohler.com/2017/01/16/01-16-17/ (“Religious liberty in the
 balance: Why the Fairness for All campaign is a threat to religious liberty”
 17
    RPCNA IRC NAE Withdrawal Statement (permission granted to cite by the
 RPCNA Interchurch Committee)
                                     1289
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 6 from Nashville Presbytery          (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 31-10 and 33-4 Regarding Suspensions during
     Process or Delay”

Whereas, it was proposed in Overture 20 to the 48th General Assembly
      (and referred to the 49th General Assembly) that BCO 31-10 and
      33-4 be amended by requiring a three-fourths (3/4) vote for a court
      to suspend an officer from his official functions when under
      process (BCO 31-10) and for a Session to suspend a member from
      approaching the Lord’s Table when it is impracticable
      immediately to commence process (BCO 33-4); and
Whereas, the vote count for passing a motion by a supermajority of three-
      fourths (3/4) is, for example, 4 votes in the affirmative on a
      Session with 5 members voting and 23 presbyters voting in the
      affirmative in a court with 30 members voting; and
Whereas, The BCO requires a three-fourths (3/4) supermajority for five
      types of exceptional and extraordinary circumstances dissimilar
      to BCO 31-10 and 33-4.
           • The first two include receiving or joining with other
               churches (BCO 14.6.h; 26-5) and changes to the
               Westminster Standards (BCO 26-3).
           • The next two are related to extraordinary exceptions to the
               internship and ordination requirements (BCO 19-6, 21-4)
               and extraordinary exceptions to the prohibition on
               assistant or associate pastors succeeding the Pastor (BCO
               23-1).
           • The last instance is the removal of the censure of
               deposition from a minister or elder (BCO 34-8; 37-6).
      These situations in our BCO all require a supermajority to protect
      the church, and the proposal in Overture 20 would instead serve
      to protect an individual; and
Whereas, the current meaning and effects of BCO 31-10 and 33-4 have
      been present within the historical stream of our Book of Church
      Order for 200 years and were included in the 1822 PCUSA Book
      of Discipline and the 1879 PCUS Rules of Discipline; and
Whereas, for those under judicial process, the court would have already
      found “a strong presumption of guilt” (BCO 31-2), defined by F.
      P. Ramsay, as “a belief by the members of the court that evidence
      as then known to them would indicate that guilt probably exists”
      (Exposition of the Book of Church Order, 1898, p. 187); and

                                  1290
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, the church Session—in the case of a Pastor under process and
       not suspended from his official functions by the Presbytery—
       would not be able to restrict the Pastor from preaching and
       teaching (BCO 20-1) or moderating the church Session (BCO 10-
       3; 12-2) except through pastoral dissolution by the congregation
       (BCO 23-1). See Committee of Commissioners on Judicial
       Business, M17GA (1989), 17-82.III, item 34, p. 167; and Report
       of the Committee on Constitutional Business, M18GA (1990),
       Appendix A, Attachment 1, III.B.4, p. 204; and
Whereas, requiring a three-quarters (3/4) supermajority vote for an
       intermediary step in the judicial process while requiring only a
       majority vote for the judgement is incongruous with the relative
       significance of these decisions; and
Whereas, ensuring proper adherence to Presbyterian polity is best
       achieved by godly presbyters carefully applying church law in its
       courts; and
Whereas, adding instructive information in our BCO to the end that
       church courts should show “prudence and wisdom” when making
       decisions under BCO 31-10 and 33-4, and adding language to 33-
       4 that “this shall never be done in the way of censure” are better
       methods of applying historic Presbyterian judicatory principles
       than constructing requirements of a supermajority vote for
       situations in which the requirement of a majority vote has stood
       the test of time in our church courts for 200 years. The terms
       “prudence” and “wisdom” used in the proposed revisions come
       from the use of the words concerning decisions of church courts,
       presbyters, pastors, and elders in the Preliminary Principles, BCO
       11-2, BCO 56-4, and BCO 57-2.
Therefore, be it resolved that Book of Church Order 31-10 and BCO 33-
       4 be amended as follows (underlining for additions, strike through
       for deletions):

        31-10. When a member of a church court is under process,
        all his official functions may be suspended at the court’s
        discretion;. The court should show prudence and wisdom in
        taking this action, and but this shall never be done in the
        way of censure.

        33-4. When it is impracticable immediately to commence
        process against an accused church member, the Session may,
        if it thinks the edification of the Church requires it, prevent
                                   1291
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        the accused from approaching the Lord’s Table until the
        charges against him can be examined. The Session should
        show prudence and wisdom in taking this action, and this
        shall never be done in the way of censure.

So that BCO 31-10 and BCO 33-4 as amended would read:

        31-10. When a member of a church court is under process,
        all his official functions may be suspended at the court’s
        discretion. The court should show prudence and wisdom in
        taking this action, and this shall never be done in the way of
        censure.

        33-4. When it is impracticable immediately to commence
        process against an accused church member, the Session may,
        if it thinks the edification of the Church requires it, prevent
        the accused from approaching the Lord’s Table until the
        charges against him can be examined. The Session should
        show prudence and wisdom in taking this action, and this
        shall never be done in the way of censure.

Adopted by the Nashville Presbytery at its 109th meeting on February 8, 2022
Attested by R. Neil Spence, Stated Clerk


OVERTURE 7 from Nashville Presbytery      (to CCB and OC)
     “Amend BCO 42-6 Regarding Suspending Judgment during
     Appeal”

Whereas, it was proposed in Overture 21 to the 48th General Assembly
      (and referred to the 49th General Assembly) that BCO 42-6 be
      amended by requiring a two-thirds (2/3) vote by the court of
      original jurisdiction to prevent an appellant from approaching the
      Lord’s Table and, if an officer, to prevent him from exercising
      some or all of his official functions until the case is decided by the
      higher court; and
Whereas, the vote count for passing a motion by a supermajority of two-
      thirds (2/3) is, for example, 4 votes in the affirmative on a Session
      with 5 members voting and 20 presbyters voting in the affirmative
      in a court with 30 members voting; and
Whereas, requiring a supermajority two-thirds (2/3) vote would increase
                                   1292
                              APPENDIX W



      the power of the higher court in the appeals process and
      downgrade the authority of the lower court which is not in keeping
      with grass roots Presbyterianism; and
Whereas, the constitutional documents within the historical stream of our
      denominational polity starting with the 1822 PCUSA Book of
      Discipline required that the judicial sentence of suspension,
      excommunication, or deposition from office “shall be considered
      as in force until the appeal shall be issued” or decided; and
      similarly, the 1879 PCUS Rules of Discipline required that the
      judicial sentence of suspension, excommunication, or deposition
      “shall nevertheless be considered as in force until the appeal shall
      be issued” or decided; and
Whereas, the 19th century minister and BCO scholar, F. P. Ramsay wrote
      in his Exposition of the Book of Church Order (1898, pp. 251-252)
      about appeals in the case of suspension, excommunication, or
      deposition and how the judgment was considered in force during
      appeal:
               “That is, one on whom such sentence has been
               passed, and who has arrested the pronouncing
               of it by his appeal, is bound to abstain from
               the sacraments or from the exercise of his
               office until the superior court passes upon his
               appeal; and not to submit himself by thus
               abstaining would itself be an offence worthy
               of the highest censure, if wittingly committed.
               If one could arrest the force of a judgment, as
               well as the pronouncing of sentence, by
               appeal, the grossest offender could not be
               reached until after most hurtful delay”
               [emphasis added]; and

Whereas, it was not until the 1925 PCUS BCO that constitutional
      language was introduced giving the court the option to suspend
      the force of the judicial sentence of suspension, excommunication,
      or deposition from office until the case was finally decided; and
Whereas, the 24th General Assembly changed BCO 42-6 significantly by
      removing the language identifying the censures of suspension,
      excommunication, and deposition as the more serious censures
      under which the judicial sentence may be kept in force during
      appeal while adding the explanation that keeping the judgment in
      force “shall never be done by way of censure;” and
                                  1293
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Whereas, F. P. Ramsay wrote, “the Rules of Discipline assume that, while
        a court may err, it will more probably be right than the party that
        objects to its action” (Exposition of the Book of Church Order,
        1898, p. 247); and
Whereas, the church Session—in the case of a Pastor inflicted with the
        censure of suspension, excommunication, or deposition who
        appealed the censure, if not prevented by their Presbytery—would
        not be able to restrict the Pastor from preaching and teaching
        (BCO 20-1) or moderating the church Session (BCO 10-3; 12-2)
        except by pastoral dissolution (BCO 23-1). See Committee of
        Commissioners on Judicial Business, M17GA (1989), 17-82.III,
        item 34, p. 167; and Report of the Committee on Constitutional
        Business, M18GA (1990), Appendix A, Attachment 1, III.B.4, p.
        204; and
Whereas, requiring a two-thirds (2/3) supermajority vote for an
        intermediary step in the judicial process while requiring only a
        majority vote for the judgement is incongruous with the relative
        significance of these decisions; and
Whereas, ensuring proper adherence to Presbyterian polity is best
        achieved by godly presbyters carefully applying church law in its
        courts; and
Whereas, when a court considers preventing an appellant from
        approaching the Lord’s Table and/or from exercising his official
        functions it may be most appropriate when the censure inflicted
        was suspension from the sacraments and/or office,
        excommunication, or deposition from office; and
Whereas, adding instructive information in our BCO to the end that
        church courts should show “prudence and wisdom” when making
        decisions under BCO 42-6 is a better method of applying historic
        Presbyterian judicatory principles than constructing requirements
        of a supermajority vote for situations in which the requirement of
        a majority vote has stood the test of time in our church courts for
        200 years. The terms “prudence” and “wisdom” used in the
        proposed revisions come from the use of the words concerning
        decisions of church courts, presbyters, pastors, and elders in the
        Preliminary Principles, BCO 11-2, BCO 56-4, and BCO 57-2.
Therefore, be it resolved that Book of Church Order 42-6 be amended as
follows (underlining for additions, strike through for deletions):

        42-6. Notice of appeal shall have the effect of suspending
        the judgment of the lower court until the case has been
                                   1294
                               APPENDIX W



        finally decided in the higher court. However, the court of
        original jurisdiction may, for sufficient reasons duly
        recorded, prevent the appellant from approaching the Lord’s
        Table, and if an officer, prevent him from exercising some
        or all his official functions, until the case is finally decided
        (cf. BCO 31-10; 33-4). Preventing the appellant from
        approaching the Lord’s Table and/or from exercising his
        official functions may be most appropriate when the censure
        is suspension from the sacraments and/or office,
        excommunication, or deposition from office. The court of
        original jurisdiction should show prudence and wisdom in
        taking this action, and Tthis shall never be done in the way
        of censure.

So that BCO 42-6 as amended would read:

        42-6. Notice of appeal shall have the effect of suspending
        the judgment of the lower court until the case has been
        finally decided in the higher court. However, the court of
        original jurisdiction may, for sufficient reasons duly
        recorded, prevent the appellant from approaching the Lord’s
        Table, and if an officer, prevent him from exercising some
        or all his official functions, until the case is finally decided
        (cf. BCO 31-10; 33-4). Preventing the appellant from
        approaching the Lord’s Table and/or from exercising his
        official functions may be most appropriate when the censure
        is suspension from the sacraments and/or office,
        excommunication, or deposition from office. The court of
        original jurisdiction should show prudence and wisdom in
        taking this action, and this shall never be done in the way of
        censure.

Adopted by the Nashville Presbytery at its 109th meeting on February 8, 2022
Attested by R. Neil Spence, stated clerk




                                    1295
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 8 from Houston Metro Presbytery           (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 33-1 and BCO 34-1 Establishing Percentage
     Threshold for Original Jurisdiction Requests”

Be it resolved that BCO 33-1 and 34-1 be amended as follows (strike-
        through for deletions, underlining for new wording):

       33-1. Process against all a church members, other than
       ministers of the Gospel, shall be entered before the Session
       of the church to which such members belongs, except in
       cases of appeal. However, if the Session refuses to act in
       doctrinal cases or instances of public scandal and two other
       Sessions of at least ten percent (10%) of churches in the same
       Presbytery request the Presbytery of which the church is a
       member to initiate proper or appropriate action in a case of
       process and thus assume original jurisdiction for a case of
       process (to first receive and initially hear and determine) and
       authority, the Presbytery shall do so.

       34-1. Process against a minister shall be entered before the
       Presbytery of which he is a member. However, if the
       Presbytery refuses to act in doctrinal cases or cases of public
       scandal and two other at least ten percent (10%) of
       Presbyteries request the General Assembly to assume
       original jurisdiction for a case of process (to first receive and
       initially hear and determine), the General Assembly shall do
       so.

So that BCO 33-1 and 34-1, as amended, would read:

       33-1. Process against a church member shall be entered
       before the Session of the church to which such member
       belongs. However, if the Sessions of at least ten percent
       (10%) of churches in the same Presbytery request the
       Presbytery of which the church is a member to assume
       original jurisdiction for a case of process, the Presbytery
       shall do so.

       34-1. Process against a minister shall be entered before the
       Presbytery of which he is a member. However, if at least ten
       percent (10%) of Presbyteries request the General Assembly
       to assume original jurisdiction for a case of process, the
       General Assembly shall do so.

                                   1296
                               APPENDIX W



RATIONALE:

BCO 34-1 is a provision that first appears in the PCA BCO and has no
exact precedent in historical Presbyterian Books of Order. In the few
instances in which it has been invoked, there has been great confusion
concerning how to apply it. There is no clear standard for “refuses to act”
nor is there a clear definition of “doctrinal cases or cases of public
scandal,” leading to uncertainty and conflict in applying the provision. The
amendment removes these provisions to bring about greater clarity and
more precise application.
In our denomination of 88 Presbyteries, a case that requires the assumption
of original jurisdiction by the General Assembly should require greater
threshold than the current standard of only two Presbyteries (2% of all
Presbyteries). The amendment also allows for a flexible standard as the
number of Presbyteries increases in the future.
BCO 33-1 is essentially the same provision as 34-1 at the lower court level,
with Sessions requesting a Presbytery to assume original jurisdiction. It
has been an anomaly that the language of 33-1 has been different from that
of 34-1. The amendment makes changes to bring them into conformity
with each other.

Adopted by Houston Metro Presbytery at its stated meeting, January 21, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Luis Veiga, stated clerk

OVERTURE 9 from Calvary Presbytery                 (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 34-1 Establishing Percentage Threshold for
     Original Jurisdiction Requests”

Be it resolved that BCO 34-1 be amended as follows (strike-through for
        deletions, underlining for new wording):

        BCO 34 - Special Rules Pertaining to Process Against a Minister
        (Teaching Elder)
        34-1. Process against a minister shall be entered before the
        Presbytery of which he is a member. However, if the Presbytery
        refuses to act in doctrinal cases or cases of public scandal, if
        two other 10% of Presbyteries request the GeneralAssembly
        to assume original jurisdiction (to first receive and initially
        hear and determine), the General Assembly shall do so.
So that BCO 34-1 reads:

                                   1297
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        34-1. Process against a minister shall be entered before the
        Presbytery of which he is a member. However, in doctrinal
        cases or cases of public scandal, if 10% of Presbyteries
        request the GeneralAssembly to assume original jurisdiction
        (to first receive and initially hear and determine), the General
        Assembly shall do so.

Rationale:
BCO 34-1 as currently written has long existed within the PCA as a
constitutional variant. Themeaning of the phrase “if the Presbytery refuses
to act” has no clear definition and has made application of its usage
ineffective.

This overture seeks to do two things simultaneously: first it clearly
defines the terms of General Assembly original jurisdiction of a
presbytery while secondly making it the process more difficult to do so
than the current threshold of 2 presbyteries. The standard of request will
increase from 2 presbyteries to 10% of presbyteries.

Adopted by Calvary Presbytery at its stated meeting, October 28, 2021
Attested by /s/ Melton L. Duncan, stated clerk


OVERTURE 10 from Southwest Florida Presbytery             (to MNA)
     “Restructure Boundary of the Presbytery of Southwest Florida”

Whereas, a presbytery confined to a smaller geographic region can lead
      to more efficient oversight, cooperation, and connection between
      particular congregations in the presbytery; and
Whereas, fostering a sense of connectionalism and cooperation of
      churches, teaching elders, and ruling elders beyond the local
      congregation is a hallmark of historic Presbyterianism; and
Whereas, a presbytery that has greater concentration within a specific
      geographic region may and should lead to a greater emphasis on
      church planting within that region; and
Whereas, a presbytery that encompasses a smaller geographic region
      should permit shorter meetings and shorter driving distances for
      presbyters to such meetings; and
Whereas, shorter distances should lead to greater participation in
      presbytery by ruling elders, thus allowing ruling elders to better
      fulfill their established calling to “govern the church well;” and
                                    1298
                              APPENDIX W



Whereas, the Guidelines for Dividing Presbyteries, as adopted by the 26th
      General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America, include
      “regional cohesiveness,” “member churches hav[ing] a potential
      for shared ministries,” and “member churches hav[ing] a common
      commitment to the region;” and
Whereas the boundaries of the Presbytery of Southwest Florida currently
      divide the Tampa Bay metropolitan area unnecessarily; and

Whereas, the Presbytery of Southwest Florida has interest in planting
      churches in the northern suburbs of Tampa, specifically Pasco
      County; and
Whereas, the Presbytery of Southwest Florida and Central Florida
      Presbytery are in accord to move Pasco County into the bounds of
      the Presbytery of Southwest Florida from Central Florida
      Presbytery;
Now therefore be it resolved, that the Presbytery of Southwest Florida
      overtures the 49th General Assembly to restructure the boundary
      of the Presbytery of Southwest Florida so that Pasco County will
      be included in its bounds, effective July 1, 2022, and that all
      existing PCA churches and church plants in Pasco County will
      come into the Presbytery of Southwest Florida, and that all
      teaching elders and churches be received following a successful
      examination, effective July 1, 2022.

Approved by the Presbytery of Southwest Florida at its stated meeting,
February 12, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Freddy Fritz, stated clerk


OVERTURE 11 from Korean Capital Presbytery            (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 25-2.e and Add a New Item BCO 25-2.f, New
     Percentage Threshold for Calling Large Church Congregational
     Meetings”

Whereas, based on the 2018 GA report, there are 1,912 churches
      comprising of 374,736 members, i.e. the average member for each
      church is 196; and
Whereas, the current threshold of communing members requesting the
      Session to call congregational meeting seems adequate for most
      of churches in the PCA especially for the church having less than
      700 communing member wherein the range of variance of
                                  1299
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       percentage proportion is from 14% to 25% of the whole
       congregation; and
Whereas, to the contrary, if a church has more than 5,000 communing
       members as an example, requiring mere 100 communing
       members according to the current threshold standard would be
       very disproportionate and unreasonable to the rest of the 4,900
       congregation members since 100 members out of 5,000 members
       represents only 2% of the whole congregation; and
Whereas, the opinions of 2% of the minority group of the whole
       congregation is not to be belittled, but not up to the point where a
       congregational meeting has to be called, it would create unhealthy
       church culture where a church would be swayed by a very small
       fraction of the congregation; and
Whereas, it is also noted that coming to a consensus by 100 members out
       of 5,000 members could be easily feasible, which may lead to
       frequent and often unnecessary congregational meeting calls, and
Whereas, the frequent congregational meetings would undermine a
       harmonious and cooperative governing body of church by
       disrupting the regular worship services, and also it may endanger
       the stability and peace of a church by disparaging opinions and
       wills of majority congregation, and
Whereas, the proposed amendment would provide a fair, appropriate and
       reasonable representation of minority church members for a
       congregation having more than 700 communing members; and
Therefore, Korean Capital Presbytery overtures to amend BCO 25-2 (e)
       and to add an additional clause (f) as follows (underlining for new
       wording):

        BCO 25-2
        e. by one hundred (100) of the communing members of a
           church of more than seven hundred (700) such members.
           but not more than one thousand (1,000) such members,

        f.   by one-tenth (1/10) of the communing members of a
             church of more than one thousand (1,000) such members.

Adopted by Korean Capital Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 8, 2019
Attested by /s/ TE Dong Woo Kim, stated clerk




                                   1300
                               APPENDIX W



OVERTURE 12 from Hills and Plains Presbytery        (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding a New Paragraph BCO 16-4 with
     Wording from the Report of the Ad Interim Committee on
     Human Sexuality”

Whereas, the Sacred Scriptures instruct us how to walk and to please God,
      abstaining from sexual immorality and controlling our bodies with
      holiness and honor (1 Thess. 4:1–5); and

Whereas, the Apostle Paul exhorts Timothy to fight the good fight of faith
      and to pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, steadfastness,
      gentleness (1 Tim. 6:11–12); and
Whereas, overseers must be above reproach (1 Tim. 3:2; Titus 1:6, 7) and
      holy (Titus 1:8), and well thought of by outsiders (1 Tim. 3:7); and
Whereas, deacons must be dignified (1 Tim. 3:8) and serve if they prove
      themselves blameless (1 Tim. 3:10); and
Whereas, the Book of Church Order declares that everyone “whom God
      calls to bear office in His Church . . . should be sound in the faith,
      and his life be according to godliness” (BCO 16-3); and
Whereas the Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality of TE Dr. Bryan
      Chapell, TE Dr. Kevin DeYoung, TE Dr. Tim Keller, TE Dr. Jim
      Weidenaar, RE Dr. Derek Halvorson, RE Mr. Kyle Keating, and
      RE Mr. Jim Pocta, studied issues assigned to it by the 47th General
      Assembly in 2019; and
Whereas, the Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality released the
      Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality in 2020;
      and
Whereas, Overture 38 [to the 48th General Assembly] to “Commend the
      Human Sexuality Report,” unanimously adopted by Calvary
      Presbytery, was answered in the affirmative by a show of hands at
      the 48th General Assembly in 2021; and
Whereas, the AIC Report says, “Christians are well-served when they can
      be honest about both their present fallen realities and their hope
      for sanctification” (p. 28); and
Whereas, the AIC Report says, “The goal is not just consistent fleeing
      from, and regular resistance to, temptation, but the diminishment
      and even the end of the occurrences of sinful desires through the
      reordering of the loves of one’s heart toward Christ” (p. 10); and
Whereas, the AIC Report says, “Desires that are inconsistent with God’s
      design are to be resisted and mortified, not celebrated or
      accommodated” (p. 28); and
                                   1301
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Whereas, the AIC Report says, “To juxtapose identities rooted in sinful
       desires alongside the term ‘Christian’ is inconsistent with Biblical
       language and undermines the spiritual reality that we are new
       creations in Christ (2 Cor. 5:17)” (p. 11); and
Whereas, the AIC Report says, “Sometimes there are disagreements about
       language even when the underlying doctrinal commitments seem to be
       the same. . . . For these reasons, how persons express themselves is not
       finally determinative of their identity” (p. 29);
Therefore, be it resolved that Hills and Plains Presbytery (PCA) overture
       the 49th General Assembly to amend the Book of Church Order
       chapter 16 by the addition of the following paragraph:

            BCO 16–4. Officers in the Presbyterian Church in
            America, though sound in the faith and living lives
            according to godliness, “are well served when they can
            be honest about both their present fallen realities and
            their hope for sanctification.” Their “goal is not just
            consistent fleeing from, and regular resistance to,
            temptation, but the diminishment and even the end of the
            occurrences of sinful desires.” “Desires that are
            inconsistent with God’s design are to be resisted and
            mortified, not celebrated or accommodated.” “To juxtapose
            identities rooted in sinful desires alongside the term
            ‘Christian’ is inconsistent with biblical language and
            undermines the spiritual reality that we are new creations
            in Christ.” “Sometimes there are disagreements about
            language even when the underlying doctrinal commitments
            seem to be the same,” and “how persons express
            themselves is not finally determinative of their identity.”

Approved by Hills and Plains Presbytery at a Called Meeting on March 5,
2022
Attested by /s/ TE Wesley D. Martin, stated clerk


OVERTURE 13 from Ascension Presbytery                               (to OC)
     “Petition United States Government to End Abortion”

Whereas, the Scriptures forbid murder of human life, as confessed in the
      Standards of the Presbyterian Church in America under the Sixth
      Commandment in Larger Catechism 134-136 and Shorter
      Catechism 67-69, and;

                                   1302
                                APPENDIX W



Whereas, The Holy Scriptures recognize human life before birth in the
      womb (Exodus 21:22-25, Psalm 17:14, Jeremiah 1:5, Isaiah
      44:24, Luke 1:41, etc.), and;

Whereas, Christians as far back as the writing of the Didache in the First
      or Second Century recognized that “you shall not abort a child or
      commit infanticide.”18 and;
Whereas, the Reformed tradition has recognized the evil of abortion from
      the days of the Reformation, with pastors such as John Calvin
      noting: “...the unborn, though enclosed in the womb of his mother,
      is already a human being, and it is an almost monstrous crime to
      rob it of life which it has not yet begun to enjoy. If it seems more
      horrible to kill a man in his own house than in a field, because a
      man's house is his most secure place of refuge, it ought surely to
      be deemed more atrocious to destroy the unborn in the womb
      before it has come to light.”19 and;
Whereas, abortion ends human life in the womb and is legal in the United
      States of America, and;
Whereas, Westminster Confession of Faith 31.4. confesses: “Synods and
      councils are to handle, or conclude nothing, but that which is
      ecclesiastical: and are not to intermeddle with civil affairs which
      concern the commonwealth, unless by way of humble petition in
      cases extraordinary; or, by way of advice, for satisfaction of
      conscience, if they be thereunto required by the civil
      magistrate.”20 and;
Whereas, in 1978 the PCA studied the issue of abortion and
      communicated the following statement to the civil authorities:
      “God declares in Sacred Scripture that civil government, no less
      than the Church, is a divine institution and owes its authority to
      God. The Bible is the supreme revelation of God's will and teaches
      that the unborn child is a human person deserving the full
      protection of the Sixth Commandment, "You shall not murder".
      We who love our nation, in the name of God who alone is
      sovereign, call upon you to renounce the sin of abortion, to repent
      of the complicity in the mass slaughter of innocent unborn
      children, who are persons in the sight of God, and to reverse the

18
     Didache. 2.2 – as translated by Michael Holmes in The Apostolic Fathers,
3rd edition.
19
     See: John Calvin. Commentary on Exodus 21:22 in Harmony of Exodus,
     Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. Vol 3, page 41-42.
20
     Emphasis added.
                                     1303
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        ruinous direction of both law and practice in this area. The
        obedience to God which places us in subjection to your rightful
        authority, requires of us to proclaim the counsel of God as it bears
        upon the same God-given authority.”21

Whereas, in 1986 the PCA again communicated its position on abortion
       to the civil authorities,22 and;
Whereas, since 1986, we have not petitioned the vast majority of the
       current federal government, as 97 out of the current 100 Senators
       were not serving, 430 out of the current 435 Representatives were
       not serving, and 9 out of the current 9 Supreme Court Justices
       were not serving, and;
Whereas, the legal murder of around 60 million babies since 1973,23 many
       disproportionately coming from minority communities, poses a
       civil rights and biblical justice abomination, and therefore
       constitutes such an extraordinary case, and;
Whereas, since the PCA’s last formal petition in 1986, tens of millions
       more innocent human lives have been destroyed through abortion,
       constituting an ongoing and extraordinary violation of justice,
Therefore Be it Resolved, Presbytery of the Ascension overtures the
       General Assembly to humbly petition the United States
       Government as below, to be sent by the Stated Clerk of the PCA:24

Humble Petition to the Honorable President, Members of Congress,
               and Justices of the Supreme Court

The 49th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America
humbly petitions the President of the United States of America, Members
of Congress, and Justices of the Supreme Court to take any and all legal
measures to protect the lives of unborn and newly-born babies from the
brutality of abortion and infanticide. We support this petition with the
following considerations.


21
     “Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Abortion,” [6th General
     Assembly (1978), Appendix O, pp. 270 - 281.],
     https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/digest/studies/2-015.html
22
     Actions of the 14th General Assembly (1986), p. 187, 14-85, III, 2.
https://pcahistory.org/pca/ga /14th_pcaga_1986.pdf
23
     https://www.grrtl.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Abortion_US.pdf
24
     Format and Wording follows the format of a OPC Humble petition of 1993
found here: https://opc.org /GA/homosexuality.html
                                   1304
                               APPENDIX W



Based on the Word of God and His Law evident in nature, terminating the
life of an unborn or newly-born baby without just cause violates God's
moral standard and therefore is sin and a great evil. According to the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, murder and the unjust taking
of another's life is forbidden, as all humans are made in the Image of God
(Gen 1:26-27) and therefore taking innocent life is a great sin against God
(Genesis 9:6). The particular sin of sacrificing of children, as was done to
the false god Molech, is called an abomination and worthy of judgment
(Leviticus 20:2-5, 1 Kings 11:7, etc). By the light of nature, moreover, we
know that the unborn is human, feels pain from an early stage, has a
beating heart from an early stage, and is not some other species but a
fellow human. Thus our God-given conscience testifies that inflicting
pain, stopping a beating heart, and thereby killing another defenseless,
fellow human being is a great evil.

While we are reluctant to address the civil magistrate except in “cases
extraordinary,” the legalization of the murder of a helpless class, that
disproportionately targets the poor and minorities, has resulted in the loss
of around 60 million lives since 1973, and thus the tragedy and evil of the
legal extermination of the unborn rises to just such a status, as few events
have in the history of our nation. The Scriptures declare that a failure to
discharge faithfully our duties to these, our helpless neighbors, would
incur the judgment of God, just as it did of the watchmen and shepherds
of Israel (Isaiah 56:9-12; Ezekiel 33:1-9; 34:1-10).

The duties of the civil government include the enforcement of laws, as a
duty from God, to be a “terror to bad conduct” as you are called to be God's
servants (Romans 13:1-7). We implore you to fulfill your divinely granted
duty before God and eliminate from our land, by any and all available
means, the legal murder known as abortion, and to call our nation to, “Let
everyone turn from his evil way and from the violence that is in his hands.
Who knows? God may turn and relent and turn from his fierce anger, so
that we may not perish” (Jonah 3:8-9).

Therefore, for the honor of Christ and his Church, and the welfare of our
nation, we exhort you to remember the words of the wisest magistrate,
"Righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people"
(Proverbs 14:34) and “Rescue those who are being taken away to death;
hold back those who are stumbling to the slaughter” (Proverbs 24:11). We
pray for you, your families, and your vocations, and we commend to you
the salvation that comes only though Jesus Christ our Lord. We urge all
                                   1305
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



faithful believers to pray for you, as we have been instructed from God's
Word: "I urge, then, first of all, that requests, prayers, intercession and
thanksgiving be made for everyone—for kings and all those in authority,
that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness" (1
Timothy 2:1-2).

Very respectfully submitted,
The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America

Adopted by the Presbytery of the Ascension at its stated meeting, January
29, 2022
Attested by /s/ RE Frederick Neikirk, stated clerk


OVERTURE 14 from Westminster Presbytery         (to CCB, OC; to SJC
                                                    for OMSJC only)
        “Change the Composition of the SJC by Amending BCO 15-4
        and RAO 17-1; Amend OMSJC 5.1 and 6.1”

Whereas, Presbyterian government is a representative form of church
       government arising from local congregations; and
Whereas, judicial appeals from presbyteries to the broader church should
       be appeals to a court representing the entire denomination; and
Whereas, the Standing Judicial Commission is currently composed of 24
       members representing about ¼ of the presbyteries in the PCA; and
Whereas, judicial decisions of the highest court in the PCA should
       accurately represent the denomination as a whole;
Therefore, be it resolved that Westminster Presbytery overtures the 49th
       General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to
       amend the Book of Church Order, Rules of Assembly Operations,
       and the SJC manual as follows:

            BCO 15-4. The General Assembly shall appoint elect a
            Standing Judicial Commission to which it shall commit
            all matters governed by the Rules of Discipline, except
            for the annual review of Presbytery records, which may
            come before the Assembly. This commission shall be
            comprised of one representative from each presbytery
            elected by the presbytery in the following manner. Each
            Presbytery shall be assigned to a class by the stated clerk
            based on its date of formation. The elders shall serve in
                                    1306
                      APPENDIX W



   classes of four-year terms, alternating between ruling
   and teaching elders. When necessary, unexpired terms
   shall be filled by an elder of the same class. consist of
   twenty-four (24) members divided into four classes of
   three teaching elders and three ruling elders in each class.
   Each class shall serve a four-year term and each
   subsequent Assembly shall declare the Standing Judicial
   Commission as a whole to be its commission.
   Nominations and vacancies shall be filled according to
   BCO 14-1(11), with nominations allowed from the floor.
   No person may be elected if there is already a member
   of the commission from the same Presbytery; but if a
   person is elected and changes Presbytery, he may
   continue to serve his full term. No person may serve
   concurrently on the General Assembly’s Standing
   Judicial Commission and any of the General Assembly’s
   permanent committees.

Rules of Assembly Operations Article 17: Standing Judicial
Commission

   RAO 17-1. There shall be a Standing Judicial
   Commission composed of one ruling or teaching elder
   from each presbytery in the Presbyterian Church in
   America twenty-four members in accordance with BCO
   15-4. Upon election, each new member of the Standing
   Judicial Commission, before entering upon the duties of
   this office, shall sign a printed copy of the following
   vows; further, if the newly elected member is present, he
   shall affirm these vows in the presence of the Assembly
   electing appointing him:

   “I do solemnly vow, by the assistance of the grace of
   God, in my service as a judge in this branch of the church
   of our lord Jesus Christ, that
       1. I will act as before God, my Judge and the
            Searcher of hearts;
       2. I will judge without respect to persons, and if so
            tempted, will recuse myself from judgment;
       3. I will judge not according to appearances, but
            judge righteous judgment;
                          1307
     MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    4. I will judge according to the Constitution of the
       Presbyterian Church in America, through my
       best efforts applied to nothing other than the
       record of the case and other documents properly
       before me; and
    5. If in a given case I find my view on a particular
       issue to be in conflict with the Constitution of
       the Presbyterian Church in America, I will
       recuse myself from such case, if I cannot
       conscientiously apply the Constitution.”

The Standing Judicial Commission shall have oversight
of appeals, complaints and judicial references from
lower courts. The Standing Judicial Commission will
report directly to the General Assembly.

The Standing Judicial Commission shall not be
separately funded but administratively will operate as a
subcommittee of the Administrative Committee of
General Assembly.

RAO 17-3. The Standing Judicial Commission may
appoint a judicial panel of not less than three of its
members to hear the case in accordance with the
provisions of the Rules of Discipline in the BCO and
these Rules of Assembly Operations. Such panels shall
be chosen as follows:
    a. A pool with the names of teaching elder
        members shall be established, and another pool
        with the names of ruling elder members shall be
        established. The chairman of the Standing
        Judicial Commission shall draw by lot names of
        panel members and alternates from each pool
        and notify the Stated Clerk of the General
        Assembly, who shall notify, immediately, those
        so chosen.
    b. If a panel member so selected shall be
        disqualified under Section 2 of the Operating
        Manual for Standing Judicial Commission, he
        shall be replaced by the alternate drawn from the
        pool.
                      1308
                            APPENDIX W



              c. The names of those panel members selected and
                 qualified shall not be returned to the pool until
                 all names therein have been exhausted. The
                 name of an alternate, who does not serve as a
                 panel member, shall be returned to the pool. The
                 names of those members whose terms expire at
                 the next General Assembly shall be withdrawn
                 from the pool on March 1 of that year.
                 Immediately after each General Assembly the
                 name of each new member appointed selected at
                 such General Assembly shall be added to his
                 respective pool.

      Operating Manual of the SJC (OMSJC)

          5. EXPENSES
          5.1 It is recommended that the expenses incurred by
          members serving on the Commission, its panels, and its
          members shall be borne be underwritten by the
          presbytery     sending     the     commissioner.      The
          administrative costs of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman,
          Secretary, and Assistant Secretary shall be borne by the
          Administrative Committee of General Assembly. All
          expenses (including travel expenses) incurred by a party
          or by the witnesses called by that party shall be borne by
          that party.

          6. QUORUM
          6.1 A quorum for the transaction of business at any
          meeting of the Commission shall be 25 13 qualified
          members, composed of at least 10 5 teaching elders and
          at least 10 5 ruling elders.

So that BCO 15-4, RAO 17-1, 17-3 and SJC Manual 5.1 and 6.1, as
          amended, would read:

          BCO 15-4. The General Assembly shall appoint a
          Standing Judicial Commission to which it shall commit
          all matters governed by the Rules of Discipline, except
          for the annual review of Presbytery records, which may
          come before the Assembly. This commission shall be
                                 1309
        MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   comprised of one representative from each presbytery
   elected by the presbytery in the following manner. Each
   Presbytery shall be assigned to a class by the stated clerk
   based on its date of formation. The elders shall serve in
   classes of four-year terms, alternating between ruling
   and teaching elders. When necessary, unexpired terms
   shall be filled by an elder of the same class. No person
   may serve concurrently on the General Assembly’s
   Standing Judicial Commission and any of the General
   Assembly’s permanent committees.

Rules of Assembly Operations Article 17: Standing Judicial
Commission

   RAO 17-1. There shall be a Standing Judicial
   Commission composed of one ruling or teaching elder
   from each presbytery in the Presbyterian Church in
   America in accordance with BCO 15-4. Upon election,
   each new member of the Standing Judicial Commission,
   before entering upon the duties of this office, shall sign
   a printed copy of the following vows; further, if the
   newly elected member is present, he shall affirm these
   vows in the presence of the Assembly appointing him:

   “I do solemnly vow, by the assistance of the grace of
   God, in my service as a judge in this branch of the church
   of our lord Jesus Christ, that
       1. I will act as before God, my Judge and the
            Searcher of hearts;
       2. I will judge without respect to persons, and if so
            tempted, will recuse myself from judgment;
       3. I will judge not according to appearances, but
            judge righteous judgment;
       4. I will judge according to the Constitution of the
            Presbyterian Church in America, through my
            best efforts applied to nothing other than the
            record of the case and other documents properly
            before me; and
       5. If in a given case I find my view on a particular
            issue to be in conflict with the Constitution of
            the Presbyterian Church in America, I will
                          1310
                  APPENDIX W



        recuse myself from such case, if I cannot
        conscientiously apply the Constitution.”

The Standing Judicial Commission shall have oversight
of appeals, complaints and judicial references from
lower courts. The Standing Judicial Commission will
report directly to the General Assembly.

RAO 17-3. The Standing Judicial Commission may
appoint a judicial panel of not less than three of its
members to hear the case in accordance with the
provisions of the Rules of Discipline in the BCO and
these Rules of Assembly Operations. Such panels shall
be chosen as follows:
    a. A pool with the names of teaching elder
        members shall be established, and another pool
        with the names of ruling elder members shall be
        established. The chairman of the Standing
        Judicial Commission shall draw by lot names of
        panel members and alternates from each pool
        and notify the Stated Clerk of the General
        Assembly, who shall notify, immediately, those
        so chosen.
    b. If a panel member so selected shall be
        disqualified under Section 2 of the Operating
        Manual for Standing Judicial Commission, he
        shall be replaced by the alternate drawn from the
        pool.
    c. The names of those panel members selected and
        qualified shall not be returned to the pool until
        all names therein have been exhausted. The
        name of an alternate, who does not serve as a
        panel member, shall be returned to the pool. The
        names of those members whose terms expire at
        the next General Assembly shall be withdrawn
        from the pool on March 1 of that year.
        Immediately after each General Assembly the
        name of each new member appointed at such
        General Assembly shall be added to his
        respective pool.


                      1311
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        OMSJC
          5. EXPENSES
          5.1 It is recommended that the expenses incurred by
          members serving on the Commission be underwritten by
          the presbytery sending the commissioner. The
          administrative costs of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman,
          Secretary, and Assistant Secretary shall be borne by the
          Administrative Committee of General Assembly. All
          expenses (including travel expenses) incurred by a party
          or by the witnesses called by that party shall be borne by
          that party.

            6. QUORUM
            6.1 A quorum for the transaction of business at any
            meeting of the Commission shall be 25 qualified
            members, composed of at least 10 teaching elders and at
            least 10 ruling elders.

Adopted by Westminster Presbytery at its stated meeting, March 12,
            2022
Attested by /s/ TE Thomas Rickard, stated clerk


OVERTURE 15 from Westminster Presbytery            (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 7 to Disqualify from Office Men Identifying
     as Homosexual”

Whereas, God created Adam and Eve and ordained the first marriage and
      family consisting of one man and one woman in sexual union,
      establishing the context for the biblical sexual ethic (Gen. 1:27-
      28; 2:24; 4:1); and
Whereas, God has established the one flesh sexual union between a
      husband and wife, as a great mystery in reference to Christ and his
      Church (Eph. 5:25; 31-32); and
Whereas, the Holy Scriptures declare that the sexual union and desire
      between one man and one woman, in the covenant of marriage, is
      righteous and holy, and all other sexual activity is unrighteous and
      sinful, including homosexuality, which the Holy Scriptures
      describe as “degrading passions” (Rom. 5:18-19; Rom. 1:26-27; 1
      Cor. 6 9-11; Eph. 5:3-5; Heb. 13:4, WCF 24:1 & 2; WLC
      138,139); and
                                  1312
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, the application of the 7th Commandment forbids the sins of
       homosexuality, unnatural lusts, and unclean affections, affirming
       that homosexual acts and the desires to commit those acts are both
       sinful (Matt. 5:27-28; WLC 139); and
Whereas, the Biblical qualifications for a church officer require him to be
       “above reproach” and the “husband of one wife,” officers and
       candidates for office must conform their lives to Biblical sexual
       ethics, which include denying and mortifying all sexual passions
       and desires toward anyone to whom they are not married (1 Tim.
       3:2); and
Whereas, identification as a “homosexual,” is sinful and against nature
       itself, is something God detests, and is not fitting for an officer of
       the Church of Christ (Lev. 18:22; 1 Tim. 3:2; Titus 1:5-6); and
Whereas, the Christian’s identity is rooted in Christ so that he is a “new
       creation” in Him, his identity cannot be defined by sexual and/any
       other desires or lifestyles that are contrary to the Holy Scriptures;
       for the Christian there is a clear distinction between self-
       conception (“this is who I am”) and their remaining indwelling sin
       (“this is what I must daily mortify”) (Rom 6:1-14; 1 Cor. 6:9-11;
       2 Cor. 5:17; Col. 3:1-5); and
Whereas, the sexual revolution and LGBTQ+ movement are infiltrating
       many quarters of the Church and causing no small amount of
       confusion; and
Whereas, the Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood’s Nashville
       Statement on biblical sexuality, affirmed by the 47th General
       Assembly of the PCA as a biblically faithful declaration, states in
       Article VII, “We deny that adopting a homosexual or transgender
       self-conception is consistent with God’s holy purposes in creation
       and redemption:”
Therefore, be it resolved that Westminster Presbytery overtures the 49th
       General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to
       amend The Book of Church Order Chapter 7 such that a new
       clause, BCO 7-4, be added, which reads as follows (new words
       underlined):

            7-4. Men who identify as homosexual, even those who
            identify as homosexual and claim to practice celibacy in
            that self-identification, are disqualified from holding
            office in the Presbyterian Church in America.

Adopted by Westminster Presbytery at its stated meeting, March 12, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Thomas Rickard, stated clerk

                                    1313
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 16 from TE Ted Lester                    (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 25-2 to Require Annual Congregational Meeting
     and Reporting Standards”

[This Overture was submitted to Northwest Georgia Presbytery for its
stated meeting, August 21, 2021, by TE Ted Lester, commissioner to NW
GA Presbytery, and was rejected by the Presbytery at its stated meeting,
January 15, 2022 (see RAO 11-10).]

Whereas, The Lord Jesus, as King and Head of His Church, has
       established a church government to be administered by Church
       officers (WCF 30.1); and
Whereas, Church officers are called to govern the holy institution of the
       Church well, promote the purity and peace within the
       congregations they shepherd, administer the sacraments, and
       provide for the spiritual well-being of the church; and
Whereas, a Presbyterian system of government prescribes that the men
       set apart for the sacred charge of Church office are selected and
       elected by members of a particular church (BCO 24); and
Whereas, inherent to a Presbyterian system of government is that the
       Word of God is to be preached only by such as are sufficiently
       gifted, and also duly approved and called to that office (WLC 158)
       and that from time to time as need arises by members who “shall,
       after consultation and deliberation recommend to the
       congregation” a pastoral candidate who in their “judgment, fulfills
       the Constitutional requirements of that office and is most suited to
       be profitable to the spiritual interests of the congregation…” (BCO
       20-2); and
Whereas, the congregation consists of all the communing members of a
       particular church, and they only are entitled to vote (BCO 25-1);
       and
Whereas, the aforementioned vote is how a congregation’s voice is
       expressed and its will exercised within a particular church; and
Whereas, all members of a particular church have vowed to “support the
       Church in its worship and work” to the best of their ability, and
       “study its purity and peace” (BCO 57-5);
Therefore, be it resolved that in order to preserve the congregational
       voice of particular churches in the PCA, and assist members in
       upholding their membership vows, the Book of Church Order 25-
       2 be amended by adding the underlined text below:


                                   1314
                              APPENDIX W



       25-2. Whenever it may seem for the best interests of the
       church that a congregational meeting should be held, the
       Session shall call such meeting and give public notice of at
       least one week. No business shall be transacted at such
       meeting except what is stated in the notice. A stated meeting
       shall be held at least once annually to consider the affairs of
       the congregation, which shall include a report on the state of
       a church’s ministry, a disclosure of the financial state of the
       church, a presentation of the terms of call for teaching elders,
       and a disclosure of the status or outcome of any judicial
       actions involving the Session or its members. The Session
       shall always call a congregational meeting when requested in
       writing to do so:
            a. by one-fourth (1/4) of the communing members of a
                church of not more than one hundred (100) such
                members,
            b. by one-fifth (1/5) of the communing members of a
                church of more than one hundred (100) and not more
                than three hundred (300) such members,
            c by one-sixth (1/6) of the communing members of a
                church of more than three hundred (300) and not
                more than five hundred (500) such members,
            d. by one-seventh (1/7) of the communing members of
                a church of more than five hundred (500) members
                but not more than seven hundred (700) such
                members,
            e. by one hundred (100) of the communing members of
                a church of more than seven hundred (700) such
                members.
            Upon such a proper request, if the Session cannot act,
       fails to act or refuses to act, to call such a congregational
       meeting within thirty (30) days from the receipt of such a
       request, then any member or members in good standing may
       file a complaint in accordance with the provisions of BCO
       43.

So that BCO 25-2 as amended would read:

       25-2. Whenever it may seem for the best interests of the
       church that a congregational meeting should be held, the
       Session shall call such meeting and give public notice of at
                                   1315
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        least one week. No business shall be transacted at such
        meeting except what is stated in the notice. A stated meeting
        shall be held at least once annually to consider the affairs of
        the congregation, which shall include a report on the state of
        a church’s ministry, a disclosure of the financial state of the
        church, a presentation of the terms of call for teaching elders,
        and a disclosure of the status or outcome of any judicial
        actions involving the Session or its members. The Session
        shall always call a congregational meeting when requested in
        writing to do so:
             a. by one-fourth (1/4) of the communing members of a
                 church of not more than one hundred (100) such
                 members,
             b. by one-fifth (1/5) of the communing members of a
                 church of more than one hundred (100) and not more
                 than three hundred (300) such members,
             c by one-sixth (1/6) of the communing members of a
                 church of more than three hundred (300) and not
                 more than five hundred (500) such members,
             d. by one-seventh (1/7) of the communing members of
                 a church of more than five hundred (500) members
                 but not more than seven hundred (700) such
                 members,
             e. by one hundred (100) of the communing members of
                 a church of more than seven hundred (700) such
                 members.
             Upon such a proper request, if the Session cannot act,
        fails to act or refuses to act, to call such a congregational
        meeting within thirty (30) days from the receipt of such a
        request, then any member or members in good standing may
        file a complaint in accordance with the provisions of BCO
        43.

Submitted by /s/ TE Ted Lester to Northwest Georgia Presbytery for its stated
        meeting, August 21, 2021
Rejected by Northwest Georgia Presbytery at its stated meeting, January 15,
        2022 (Attested by /s/ TE David Gilbert, stated clerk)
Submitted by /s/ TE Ted Lester to the 49th General Assembly of the PCA,
        March 25, 2022



                                    1316
                               APPENDIX W



OVERTURE 17 from TE Ted Lester                     (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 32-3 to Require Open Proceedings for Trials”

[This Overture was submitted to Northwest Georgia Presbytery for its
stated meeting, August 21, 2021, by TE Ted Lester, commissioner to NW
GA Presbytery, and was rejected by the Presbytery at its stated meeting,
January 15, 2022 (see RAO 11-10).]

Whereas, the Lord Jesus Christ turns darkness into light (Is. 42:16; Jn.
      8:12); and
Whereas, the Bible, as the written Word of God, is a lamp unto our feet
      (Ps. 119:105); and
Whereas, to be imitators of Christ, we should also speak openly to the
      world and speak nothing, especially the rendering of justice by
      application of God’s Word, in secret (Jn. 18:20); and
Whereas, the Bible commands that we “render in your gates judgments
      that are true and make for peace” (Zech. 8:16); and
Whereas, Biblical authority supersedes that of Robert’s Rules of Order,
      so that the Biblical prescription for open courts overrides the
      prescription of Robert’s Rules or any other subordinate and
      contradictory source on how to hold and conduct a trial; and
Whereas, the authors of the U.S. Constitution incorporated the Biblical
      principles of open trials into the nation’s founding documents,
      ensuring that the accused in civil courts are afforded “the right to
      a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury” (Amendment VI
      U.S. Constitution); and
Whereas, church courts seemingly mirror the rights afforded to the
      accused in civil courts save for the right to a public trial (BCO 32);
      and
Whereas, for church courts to operate in a manner that deprives the
      accused of this Biblical right is to operate on a lower moral plane
      than ordered by the Holy Scriptures and afforded by the world at
      large; and
Whereas, transparency promotes accountability; and
Whereas, open church courts encourage prosecutors to “speak the truth in
      love” (Eph. 4:15); and
Whereas, open church courts encourage the accused to act “with all
      humility and gentleness, with patience” bearing with others in
      love (Eph. 4:2); and
Whereas, exercising church discipline is highly important and necessary,
      and in proper usage maintains the glory of God, the purity of His
                                   1317
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       Church, and the reclamation of disobedient sinners (BCO 27-3);
       and
Whereas, open church court proceedings assist teaching elders in their
       charge to instruct the officers and the congregation in discipline
       (BCO 27-4);
Therefore, be it resolved that in order that discipline may be exercised
       with mercy openly, the Book of Church Order 32-3 be amended
       by adding the underlined text below:

        32-3. It is appropriate that with each citation the moderator
        or clerk call the attention of the parties to the Rules of
        Discipline (BCO 27 through 46) and assist the parties to
        obtain access to them. When a charge is laid before the
        Session or Presbytery, it shall be reduced to writing, and
        nothing shall be done at the first meeting of the court, unless
        by consent of parties, except:
            1. to appoint a prosecutor,
            2. to order the indictment drawn and a copy, along with
                 names of witnesses then known to support it, served
                 on the accused, and
            3. to cite the accused to appear and be heard at another
                 meeting which shall not be sooner than ten days after
                 such citation.
            At the second meeting of the court the charges shall be
        read to the accused, if present, and he shall be called upon to
        say whether he be guilty or not.
            If the accused confesses, the court may deal with him
        according to its discretion; if he plead and take issue, the trial
        shall be scheduled and all parties and their witnesses cited to
        appear. The trial shall not be sooner than fourteen (14) days
        after such citation. Courts of the church shall ordinarily sit
        with open doors. In every case, the court shall be without
        power to sit with closed doors if the accused insists on an
        open trial. No court may subject the accused to a closed trial
        against their will.
            Accused parties may plead in writing when they cannot
        be personally present. Parties necessarily absent should have
        counsel assigned to them.

So that BCO 32-3 as amended would read:


                                     1318
                                APPENDIX W



        32-3. It is appropriate that with each citation the moderator
        or clerk call the attention of the parties to the Rules of
        Discipline (BCO 27 through 46) and assist the parties to
        obtain access to them. When a charge is laid before the
        Session or Presbytery, it shall be reduced to writing, and
        nothing shall be done at the first meeting of the court, unless
        by consent of parties, except:
            1. to appoint a prosecutor,
            2. to order the indictment drawn and a copy, along with
                 names of witnesses then known to support it, served
                 on the accused, and
            3. to cite the accused to appear and be heard at another
                 meeting which shall not be sooner than ten days after
                 such citation.
            At the second meeting of the court the charges shall be
        read to the accused, if present, and he shall be called upon to
        say whether he be guilty or not.
            If the accused confesses, the court may deal with him
        according to its discretion; if he plead and take issue, the trial
        shall be scheduled and all parties and their witnesses cited to
        appear. The trial shall not be sooner than fourteen (14) days
        after such citation. Courts of the church shall ordinarily sit
        with open doors. In every case, the court shall be without
        power to sit with closed doors if the accused insists on an
        open trial. No court may subject the accused to a closed trial
        against their will.
            Accused parties may plead in writing when they cannot
        be personally present. Parties necessarily absent should have
        counsel assigned to them.

Submitted by /s/ TE Ted Lester to Northwest Georgia Presbytery for its stated
        meeting, August 21, 2021
Rejected by Northwest Georgia Presbytery at its stated meeting, January 15,
        2022 (Attested by /s/ TE David Gilbert, stated clerk)
Submitted by /s/ TE Ted Lester to the 49th General Assembly of the PCA,
        March 25, 2022




                                     1319
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 18 from Pacific Northwest Presbytery           (to CCB, AC)
     “Amend RAO 3-2 by Adding an Administrative Responsibility
     for the Stated Clerk’s Office Regarding the Processing of
     Allegations.”

Be it resolved that RAO 3-2 be amended as follows. Underlined wording
is to be added.

        RAO 3-2. The Stated Clerk shall have the following
        responsibilities to the General Assembly ...
            s. He shall be the correspondent with the lower courts
            of the church.
            t. He shall forward all allegations, or suggestions of
                 need for disciplinary attention, to the appropriate
                 court, or shall instruct individuals how they may do
                 so. Ordinarily, the person who is the subject of the
                 allegation or suggestion will also be copied. This
                 responsibility is an administrative one, not a judicial
                 one and the Stated Clerk’s Office should ordinarily
                 avoid expressing any opinion on the merits.
            u. He shall be authorized to make public statements for
                 and on behalf of the denomination only insofar as
                 such statements are warranted on the basis of
                 specific actions of the General Assembly.

Rationale: While this new responsibility would not be limited to specific
areas, much of our concern arises from things related to public speech. So,
the rationale below focuses on that subject as an example.

1. The Bible requires we portray the message and manner of Christ in
   our communication. (Ex. 20:16, Matt. 5:22, 1 Cor 6:9-10, Eph. 4:31-
   32, Tit. 3:1-2, 1 Pet. 2:1)
   Note: All Scriptures cited in this Overture are printed later below.
2. The Bible forbids publishing false reports or spreading rumors and
   suspicions without foundation or confirming the facts with the individuals
   cited. (Ex. 23:1, Matt. 12:36-37; Matt. 18:15-17, 1 Tim. 5:19)
3. The Bible forbids giving attention to gossip, slander, or malicious
   speech. (Prov. 17:4, 20:19, 26:20)
4. Our Confessional Standards call us to high standards of truth and
   charity in reporting the actions and words of others, and in protecting


                                    1320
                               APPENDIX W



    their reputations against falsehood, unwarranted damage, and
    suspicion, saying:

        The sins forbidden in the ninth commandment are, all
        prejudicing the truth, and the good name of our
        neighbors,…concealing the truth…; speaking the truth
        unseasonably, or maliciously to a wrong end, or perverting it
        to a wrong meaning,…speaking untruth, lying, slandering,
        backbiting, detracting, talebearing, whispering, scoffing,
        reviling,…misconstructing intentions, words, and actions…;
        aggravating smaller faults;…unnecessary discovering of
        infirmities; raising false rumors, receiving and
        countenancing evil reports;…evil suspicion;…rejoicing in
        [others’] disgrace and infamy; scornful contempt…;
        neglecting such things as are of good report, and practicing,
        or not avoiding ourselves, or not hindering what we can in
        others, such things as procure an ill name. (WLC #145)

5. The speech and publication practices of secular culture can make
   believers unaware of, or callous to, these biblical standards.
6. There is a temptation for church leaders to disregard these biblical
   standards in social media, internet discussions, and news sites that deal
   with church matters.

Approved by Presbytery’s BCO 15-1 Overtures Commission on April 4,
    2022
Overtures Commission appointed by Pacific NW Presbytery on February 4,
    2022
Attested by /s/ TE Nathan Chambers, stated clerk

Scriptures Cited Above (ESV)

You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. (Ex. 20:16)

But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be liable
to judgment; whoever insults his brother will be liable to the council; and
whoever says, 'You fool!' will be liable to the hell of fire. (Matt. 5:22)

Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of
God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality, nor thieves, nor the
                                   1321
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



greedy, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom
of God (1 Cor. 6:9, 10)

Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander be put away
from you, along with all malice. Be kind to one another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, as God in Christ forgave you. (Eph (Eph. 4:31-32)

Remind … to speak evil of no one, to avoid quarreling, to be gentle, and
to show perfect courtesy toward all people. (Tit. 3:1-2)

So put away all malice and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all
slander. (1Pet. 2:1)

You shall not spread a false report. You shall not join hands with a wicked
man to be a malicious witness. (Ex. 23:1)

I tell you, on the day of judgment people will give account for every
careless word they speak, for by your words you will be justified, and by
your words you will be condemned. (Matt. 12:36-37)

If your brother sins against you, go and tell him his fault, between you and
him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother. But if he
does not listen, take one or two others along with you, that every charge
may be established by the evidence of two or three witnesses. If he refuses
to listen to them, tell it to the church. (Matt. 18:15-17)
Do not admit a charge against an elder except on the evidence of two or
three witnesses. (1 Tim. 5:19)

An evildoer listens to wicked lips, and a liar gives ear to a mischievous
tongue. (Prov. 17:4)

Whoever goes about slandering reveals secrets; therefore do not associate
with a simple babbler (Prov. 20:19)

For lack of wood the fire goes out, and where there is no whisperer,
quarreling ceases. (Prov. 26:20)




                                   1322
                               APPENDIX W



OVERTURE 19 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery    (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 15-2 Regarding Presbytery Commission
     Membership and Quorum”

Whereas, BCO 15 deals with Ecclesiastical Commissions in the courts of
       the Church; and
Whereas, the wording in 15-2 paragraph 2, sentence 1 differs from the
       wording of 15-3, sentence 2; and
Whereas, the difference in wording may lead to misunderstanding about
       the makeup of a Presbytery Commission;
Therefore, be it resolved that in order to clarify, to insure consistency,
       and to avoid any future confusion, BCO 15-2, paragraph 2,
       sentence 1, be amended by adding the underlined text below
       (strike-through for deletions).

            15-2. Paragraph 2:
                Every commission appointed by Presbytery shall
            consist of at least two teaching elders and two ruling
            elders from its members, and the Presbytery at the time
            of the appointment of the commission shall determine
            what the quorum shall be., and the quorum shall be one
            more than half its membership unless otherwise
            determined by the Presbytery. However, should a
            Presbytery clothe a commission with judicial powers and
            authority to conduct judicial process, or with power to
            ordain or install a teaching elder of the Gospel, the
            quorum of such commission shall not be less than two
            teaching elders and two ruling elders. The quorum for a
            commission appointed as an interim session need not
            conform to the requirements of a judicial commission,
            but only to those of a session (BCO 12-1). When the
            ordination of a minister is committed to a commission,
            the Presbytery itself shall conduct the previous
            examination.

        All other wording of 15-2 shall remain unchanged.

Adopted by Northwest Georgia Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 5,
2022
Attested by /s/ TE David E. Gilbert, stated clerk


                                   1323
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 20 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery    (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding Paragraph 16-4 on Qualifications
     for Ordination”

Whereas, the Westminster Standards make a categorical distinction
      between the “state of sin” and the “state of grace” (WCF 9.3-4);
      and
Whereas, ever since the Fall, man is naturally in the “state of sin” in which
      he has lost all ability to will and to do any spiritual good and is a
      slave to the penalty, guilt, and power of sin (WCF 9.3); and
Whereas, in the state of sin, his sin defines who he is, and he must rightly
      conceive of himself and label himself as a fornicator, idolater,
      adulterer, effeminate, homosexual, thief, drunkard, reviler, and
      swindler (1 Cor. 6:9-10); in this state of sin, that is how he is to
      consider himself and identify himself because he is a slave to sin;
      and
Whereas, when the Holy Spirit works faith in man, uniting him to Christ
      in his effectual calling, he is translated into the “state of grace”
      (WCF 9.4; WSC 30) and partakes of the benefits of justification,
      adoption, and sanctification (WSC 30-32); and
Whereas, in this state, while he does not perfectly or only will that which
      is good but also that which is evil (due to his remaining
      corruption), he is freed from bondage to sin and by grace is
      enabled freely to will and to do that which is spiritually good
      (WCF 9.4); and
Whereas, the conversion from the state of sin to the state of grace is so
      dramatic and the distinction between the two so vast that the
      Christian is no longer to conceive of himself and label himself as
      a fornicator, idolater, adulterer, effeminate, homosexual, thief,
      drunkard, reviler, and swindler; Scripture says such will not
      inherit the kingdom of God, “and such were some of you” (1 Cor.
      6:9-11); in the state of grace, the believer is no longer to identify
      that way (e.g. as a fornicator, idolater, adulterer, etc.) for “you
      were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name
      of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God” (1 Cor. 6:9-
      11); because of his union with Christ, his specific sins no longer
      define who he is; and
Whereas, due to remaining corruption, the Christian can still speak of
      himself as a sinner in the present tense (1 Tim. 1:12-16) as one
      who continues to experience and battle with the presence and
      pollution of sin (Gal. 5:17; Rom. 7:14-25) and even at times feel
                                    1324
                               APPENDIX W



       as though he is enslaved to sin (Rom. 7:14); however, the truth is
       that the believer is no longer a slave to sin, having been freed from
       slavery to its guilt (Rom. 3:24; Eph. 1:7), its penalty (Gal. 3:13),
       and its power (1 Pet. 1:18-19; Rom. 6:6); and
Whereas, while of course the Christian is (and can say he is) a sinner (1
       Tim. 1:12-16), he is no longer to identify himself with his specific
       sins; as Paul says, “Such were some of you” (1Cor. 6:9-11), and
       “Though formerly I was a blasphemer, persecutor, and insolent
       opponent…I received mercy…in Christ Jesus” (1 Tim. 1:13-14);
       and
Whereas, instead of considering himself as a drunkard or an adulterer or
       a homosexual, the Christian is commanded to have a different self-
       conception: “You must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive
       to God in Christ Jesus” (Rom. 6:11); and
Whereas, the Christian may continue to struggle with the same sins all his
       life long; such a believer should not consider himself a drunkard
       or an adulterer or a homosexual but rather a Christian who
       struggles with the temptation to drunkenness, adultery, or
       homosexuality; and who is repentant if or when he succumbs to
       such temptations; and
Whereas, BCO 16-1 reads, “Ordinary vocation to office in the Church is
       the calling of God by the Spirit, through the inward testimony of
       a good conscience, the manifest approbation of God’s people, and
       the concurring judgment of a lawful court of the Church;” and
Whereas, BCO 16-2 reads, “The government of the Church is by officers
       gifted to represent Christ, and the right of God’s people to
       recognize by election to office those so gifted is inalienable.
       Therefore no man can be placed over a church in any office
       without the election, or at least the consent of that church;” and
Whereas, BCO 16-3 reads, “Upon those whom God calls to bear office in
       His Church He bestows suitable gifts for the discharge of their
       various duties. And it is indispensable that, besides possessing the
       necessary gifts and abilities, natural and acquired, every one
       admitted to an office should be sound in the faith, and his life be
       according to godliness. Wherefore every candidate for office is to
       be approved by the court by which           he is to be ordained;” and
Therefore, be it resolved that BCO 16 be amended by adding 16-4 as a
       new paragraph with the following wording (underlining for new
       wording):



                                    1325
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            16-4. Those whom God calls to bear office in His Church
            shall demonstrate maturity of faith and growing
            conformity to Jesus Christ. While these office bearers
            will see spiritual perfection only in glory, they will
            continue in this life doing battle with and confessing
            remaining sins. Thus, those who identify or describe
            themselves according to their specific sins, or who teach
            that it is acceptable for Christians to identify or describe
            in such a manner, shall not be approved for service by
            any court of Christ’s Church.

Adopted by Northwest Georgia Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 5,
2022
Attested by /s/ TE David E. Gilbert, stated clerk


OVERTURE 21 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery      (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 43-2 and 43-3 Regarding Timing for
     Considering a Complaint”

Whereas, some may seek to apply the BCO without fair exception in the
      timing of finalizing a decision on a complaint, which possibility
      this overture believes could disadvantage Sessions; and
Whereas, matters of judicial complaint are normally complex and require
      deliberation (James 1:19); and
Whereas, in fairness both to complainants and lower courts, requiring an
      immediate decision at the same meeting after a first hearing (Prov.
      18:17), if little or no time for consideration or prayer is permitted,
      may create a burden on Sessions or an unhelpful precedent; and
Whereas, the Clerk’s Handbook regularly permits presbytery
      commissions time to deliberate, without requiring an immediate
      answer to a complaint at the same time as the hearing, as long as
      it is found in order and heard in a timely manner (Clerk’s
      Handbook, Appendix H 11 allows a presbytery commission to
      “adjourn and reconvene within the next 10 days, as often as
      necessary . . . “); and
Whereas, this analogy continues with the Standing Judicial Commission
      (SJC), routinely allowing SJC panels to deliberate for up to 20
      days (OMSJC 10.10) after oral arguments before finalizing a
      decision; and


                                   1326
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, the proposed amendment below only affects the timing of the
       final decision on a complaint, allowing the court not to be
       pressured to surrender its due deliberation if a complaint were
       tendered as little as hours before a stated meeting; and
Whereas, this amendment would clarify that Sessions have the same,
       analogous opportunities for due deliberation as the higher courts
       for the good of the peace and purity of the church;
Therefore, be it resolved that both BCO 43-2 and 43-3 be amended to
       include the common-sensical provision by adding the words
       “provided that the complaint has been filed with the clerk at least
       seven (7) days in advance,” such that the BCO reads (proposed
       addition in bold):

            43-2. A complaint shall first be made to the court whose
            act or decision is alleged to be in error. Written notice of
            complaint, with supporting reasons, shall be filed with
            the clerk of the court within sixty (60) days following the
            meeting of the court. The court shall consider the
            complaint at its next stated meeting, or at a called
            meeting prior to its next stated meeting, provided that the
            complaint has been filed with the clerk at least seven (7)
            days in advance. No attempt should be made to
            circularize the court to which complaint is being made
            by either party.

            43-3. If, after considering a complaint, the court alleged
            to be delinquent or in error is of the opinion that it has
            not erred, and denies the complaint, the complainant may
            take that complaint to the next higher court. If the lower
            court fails to consider the complaint against it by or at its
            next stated meeting, provided that the complaint has
            been filed with the clerk at least seven (7) days in
            advance, the complainant may take that complaint to the
            next higher court. Written notice thereof shall be filed
            with both the clerk of the lower court and the clerk of the
            higher court within thirty (30) days of notification of the
            last court’s decision.
                 Notification of the last court’s decision shall be
            deemed to have occurred on the day of mailing (if
            certified, registered or express mail of a national postal
            service or any private service where verifying receipt is
                                    1327
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            utilized), the day of hand delivery, or the day of
            confirmed receipt in the case of e-mail or facsimile.
            Furthermore, compliance with such requirements shall
            be deemed to have been fulfilled if a party cannot be
            located after diligent inquiry or if a party refuses to
            accept delivery.

Adopted by Northwest Georgia Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 5, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE David E. Gilbert, stated clerk


OVERTURE 22 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery           (CCB, AC)
     “Amend RAO 3-2.h, Making Statistical Data Digitally
     Accessible”

Whereas, the Lord Jesus Christ charged Peter with the keys of the
       kingdom (Matt 16:19) and our confessional standards further
       outline this important responsibility as being held by Church
       officers (WCF, Ch XXX); and
Whereas, elsewhere in Scripture elders are exhorted to “shepherd the
       flock of God” (1 Pet 5:2) by exercising “oversight”; and
Whereas, in the past this necessitated close proximity between Church
       officers and congregants. However, our present time is marked by
       an increasing transience among all members of society, including
       those in our denomination; and
Whereas, advancements in digital communications now enable oversight
       across vast distances; and
Whereas, the number of congregations within the PCA has increased to
       nearly a thousand throughout North America; and
Whereas, each congregation submits statistical data to the Administrative
       Committee on a yearly basis for the annual PCA Yearbook; and
Whereas, the Stated Clerk’s office already provides the minutes of the
       General Assembly in digital format; and
Whereas, the production of minutes and statistics in electronic format will
       reduce the cost of, and time necessary for their production; and
Whereas, the cost of producing the PCA Yearbook is already accounted
       for and, therefore, access for fee of a digital version will likely
       offset, and possibly generate profit;
Therefore, be it resolved that the Presbytery of Northwest Georgia
       hereby overtures the 49th General Assembly to amend RAO 3-2.h
       by adding the following guidance (additions underlined):
                                   1328
                               APPENDIX W



            RAO 3-2.h
            h. He shall be responsible for publishing the minutes
               and statistical reports of the Presbyterian Church in
               America and periodically updating the digest of the
               minutes. Likewise, these minutes and statistical
               reports (i.e. ‘The PCA Yearbook’) shall be made
               available in digital format (i.e. .pdf, .xlxs, etc.).

Adopted by Northwest Georgia Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 5,
2022
Attested by /s/ TE David E. Gilbert, stated clerk


OVERTURE 23 from Southeast Alabama Presbytery    (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding Paragraph 16-4 on Qualifications
     for Ordination”

[Note: Only the wording of the second sentence of this overture’s proposed
BCO paragraph differs from the proposed wording in Overture 20.]

Whereas, the Westminster Standards make a categorical distinction
      between the “state of sin” and the “state of grace” (WCF 9.3-4);
      and
Whereas, ever since the Fall, man is naturally in the “state of sin” in which
      he has lost all ability to will and to do any spiritual good and is a
      slave to the penalty, guilt, and power of sin (WCF 9.3); and
Whereas, in the state of sin, his sin defines who he is, and he must rightly
      conceive of himself and label himself as a fornicator, idolater,
      adulterer, homosexual, thief, drunkard, reviler, and swindler (1
      Cor. 6:9-10); in this state of sin, that is how he is to consider
      himself and identify himself because he is a slave to sin; and
Whereas, when the Holy Spirit works faith in man, uniting him to Christ
      in his effectual calling, he is translated into the “state of grace”
      (WCF 9.4; WSC 30) and partakes of the benefits of justification,
      adoption, and sanctification (WSC 30-32); and

Whereas, in this state, while he does not perfectly or only will that which
      is good but also that which is evil (due to his remaining
      corruption), he is freed from bondage to sin and by grace is
      enabled freely to will and to do that which is spiritually good
      (WCF 9.4); and
                                    1329
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Whereas, the conversion from the state of sin to the state of grace is so
      dramatic and the distinction between the two so vast that the
      Christian is no longer to conceive of himself and label himself as
      a fornicator, idolater, adulterer, homosexual, thief, drunkard,
      reviler, and swindler; Scripture says such will not inherit the
      kingdom of God, “and such were some of you” (1 Cor. 6:9-11); in
      the state of grace, the believer is no longer to identify that way
      (e.g. as a fornicator, idolater, adulterer, etc.) for “you were
      washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the
      Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God” (1 Cor. 6:9-11);
      because of his union with Christ, his specific sins no longer define
      who he is; and
Whereas, due to remaining corruption, the Christian can still speak of
      himself as a sinner in the present tense (1 Tim. 1:12-16) as one
      who continues to experience and battle with the presence and
      pollution of sin (Gal. 5:17; Rom. 7:14-25) and even at times feel
      as though he is enslaved to sin (Rom. 7:14); however, the truth is
      that the believer is no longer a slave to sin, having been freed from
      slavery to its guilt (Rom. 3:24; Eph. 1:7), its penalty (Gal. 3:13),
      and its power (1 Pet. 1:18-19; Rom. 6:6); and
Whereas, while of course the Christian is (and can say he is) a sinner (1
      Tim. 1:12-16), he is no longer to identify himself with his specific
      sins; as Paul says, “Such were some of you” (1Cor. 6:9-11), and
      “Though formerly I was a blasphemer, persecutor, and insolent
      opponent… I received mercy… in Christ Jesus” (1 Tim. 1:13-14);
      and
Whereas, instead of considering himself as a drunkard or an adulterer or
      a homosexual, the Christian is commanded to have a different self-
      conception: “You must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive
      to God in Christ Jesus” (Rom. 6:11); and
Whereas, the Christian may continue to struggle with the same sins all his
      life long; such a believer should not consider himself a drunkard
      or an adulterer or a homosexual but rather a Christian who
      struggles with the temptation to drunkenness, adultery, or
      homosexuality; and who is repentant if or when he succumbs to
      such temptations; and
Whereas, BCO 16-1 reads, “Ordinary vocation to office in the Church is
      the calling of God by the Spirit, through the inward testimony of
      a good conscience, the manifest approbation of God’s people, and
      the concurring judgment of a lawful court of the Church;” and


                                   1330
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, BCO 16-2 reads, “The government of the Church is by officers
       gifted to represent Christ, and the right of God’s people to
       recognize by election to office those so gifted is inalienable.
       Therefore no man can be placed over a church in any office
       without the election, or at least the consent of that church;” and
Whereas, BCO 16-3 reads, “Upon those whom God calls to bear office in
       His Church He bestows suitable gifts for the discharge of their
       various duties. And it is indispensable that, besides possessing the
       necessary gifts and abilities, natural and acquired, every one
       admitted to an office should be sound in the faith, and his life be
       according to godliness. Wherefore every candidate for office is to
       be approved by the court by which he is to be ordained;” and
Therefore, be it resolved that BCO 16 be amended by adding 16-4 as a
       new paragraph with the following wording (underlining for new
       wording):

            16-4. Those whom God calls to bear office in His Church
            shall demonstrate maturity of faith and growing
            conformity to Jesus Christ. While these office bearers
            will see spiritual perfection only in glory, they will
            continue in this life to confess and to mortify remaining
            sins. Thus, those who identify or describe themselves
            according to their specific sins, or who teach that it is
            acceptable for Christians to identify or describe
            themselves in such a manner, shall not be approved for
            service by any court of Christ’s Church.

Adopted by Southeast Alabama Presbytery at its called meeting on March
31, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Kevin Corley, stated clerk


OVERTURE 24 from Houston Metro Presbytery         (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend RAO 11-2 and 11-10 to Clarify Who May Submit
      an Overture”

Be it resolved that RAO 11-2 and 11-10 be amended as follows (strike-
        through for deletions, underlining for new wording):

        11-2. Communications from individuals shall not be received
        by the General Assembly, unless they originate with persons
                                   1331
                MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       who have no other access to the Assembly. If the Assembly
       desires to receive and consider any such communications,
       other than as information, the Stated Clerk shall recommend
       reference to the proper Assembly committee. Letters,
       telegrams, emails, or telephone calls from communicants or
       congregations of the Presbyterian Church in America are not
       proper communications, and are not to be received by the
       Assembly.

       11-10. No overture will be considered by the General
       Assembly until it first has been presented to a presbytery. If
       approved by the presbytery, it will come before the
       Assembly as the overture of that court. An overture
       requested by an individual communicant a ruling elder
       commissioner to presbytery, a teaching elder, or a session,
       but rejected by the presbytery, may be presented to the
       Assembly, provided the fact that it was rejected by the
       presbytery is clearly stated with the overture. the overture
       includes as an attachment a copy of the relevant extract from
       the minutes of the meeting at which presbytery rejected the
       overture or correspondence from presbytery’s Stated Clerk
       confirming presbytery’s rejection of the overture. Such an
       overture must be the same overture as that presented to and
       rejected by the presbytery.

So that RAO 11-2 and 11-10 as amended, would read:

       11-2. Communications from individuals shall not be received
       by the General Assembly, unless they originate with persons
       who have no other access to the Assembly. If the Assembly
       desires to receive and consider any such communications,
       other than as information, the Stated Clerk shall recommend
       reference to the proper Assembly committee. Letters,
       telegrams, emails, or telephone calls from communicants or
       congregations of the Presbyterian Church in America are not
       proper communications, and are not to be received by the
       Assembly.

       11-10. No overture will be considered by the General
       Assembly until it first has been presented to a presbytery. If
       approved by the presbytery, it will come before the
                                  1332
                               APPENDIX W



        Assembly as the overture of that court. An overture
        requested by a ruling elder commissioner to presbytery, a
        teaching elder, or a session, but rejected by the presbytery,
        may be presented to the Assembly, provided the overture
        includes as an attachment a copy of the relevant extract from
        the minutes of the meeting at which presbytery rejected the
        overture or correspondence from presbytery’s Stated Clerk
        confirming presbytery’s rejection of the overture. Such an
        overture must be the same overture as that presented to and
        rejected by the presbytery.

RATIONALE:

The current provision in RAO 11-10 is confusing in that it implies that an
individual communicant member of a church may send an overture to the
General Assembly. Communications from individuals outside the PCA are
to be dealt with in accordance with RAO 11-2. Individual PCA members
have access to the General Assembly indirectly through their Sessions and
Presbyteries. Overtures ordinarily are the request of a Presbytery for action
by the General Assembly (RAO 11-4, emphasis added).

An individual member does not have the ability to move an overture for
consideration by a Presbytery, because unless that individual is a ruling
elder commissioner to a Presbytery meeting, he is not a member of the
body and therefore does not have the privilege of making motions. Such a
member could have another who is a member or a Session make such a
motion, but if the motion for an overture is rejected by Presbytery, that
other member or Session would need to present the rejected overture to
the General Assembly.

The revised language clarifies what is permissible in accordance with the
RAO and Robert’s Rules.

Adopted by Houston Metro Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 11, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Lou Veiga, stated clerk




                                    1333
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 25 from Houston Metro Presbytery           (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 15-1 and 15-3 to Clarify Role of Presbytery
     Commission”

Be it resolved that BCO 15-1 and 15-3 be amended as follows (strike-
        through for deletions, underlining for new wording):

       15-1. A commission differs from an ordinary committee in
       that while a committee is appointed to examine, consider and
       report, a commission is authorized to deliberate upon and
       conclude the business referred to it, except in the case of
       judicial commissions of a Presbytery appointed under BCO
       15-3. A commission shall keep a full record of its
       proceedings, which shall be submitted to the court appointing
       it. Upon such submission this record shall be entered on the
       minutes of the court appointing, the date of the submission
       being the date of “the meeting of the court” for the filing
       requirements of a complaint under BCO 43-2., except in the
       case of a presbytery commission serving as a session or a
       judicial commission as set forth in BCO 15-3. The effective
       date of dismissal of a commission of session or presbytery
       shall be not before the time allowed for the filing of a
       complaint or appeal against that commission’s decision has
       expired. Any complaint or appeal so timely filed, shall be
       adjudicated by that commission until the matter is settled by
       the highest court. When a commission is appointed to serve
       as an interim Session, its actions are the actions of a Session,
       not a Presbytery. Every commission of a Presbytery or
       Session must submit complete minutes and a report of its
       activities at least once annually to the court which
       commissioned it.

       15-3. Presbytery as a whole may try a judicial case within its
       jurisdiction (including the right to refer any strictly
       constitutional issue to a study committee with options listed
       below), hear a case, with or without process (BCO 31-38), a
       reference (BCO 41), an appeal (BCO 42), a complaint (BCO
       43), a BCO 40-5 proceeding, or a request to assume original
       jurisdiction (BCO 33-1) properly before it, or it may of its
       own motion commit any judicial such a case to a
       commission. Such a commission shall be appointed by the
                                   1334
                              APPENDIX W



       Presbytery from its members other than members of the
       Session of the church from which the case comes up. The
       commission shall try the case in the manner presented by the
       Rules of Discipline and shall submit to the Presbytery a full
       statement of the case and the judgment rendered. The
       Presbytery without debate shall approve or disapprove of the
       judgment, or may refer, (a debatable motion), any strictly
       constitutional issue(s) to a study committee. In case of
       referral, the Presbytery shall either dismiss some or all of the
       specific charges raised in the case or decide the case only
       after the report of the study committee has sbeen heard and
       discussed. If Presbytery approves, the The judgment of the
       commission shall be final and shall be entered on the minutes
       of Presbytery as the action the decision of the Presbytery, and
       the statement of the case and judgment printed in its minutes.
       If Presbytery disapproves, it shall hear the case as a whole,
       or appoint a new commission to hear the case again.

So that BCO 15-1 and 15-3, as amended, would read:

       15-1. A commission differs from an ordinary committee in
       that while a committee is appointed to examine, consider and
       report, a commission is authorized to deliberate upon and
       conclude the business referred to it. A commission shall
       keep a full record of its proceedings, which shall be
       submitted to the court appointing it. Upon such submission
       this record shall be entered on the minutes of the court
       appointing, the date of the submission being the date of “the
       meeting of the court” for the filing requirements of a
       complaint under BCO 43-2. The effective date of dismissal
       of a commission of session or presbytery shall be not before
       the time allowed for the filing of a complaint or appeal
       against that commission’s decision has expired. Any
       complaint or appeal so timely filed, shall be adjudicated by
       that commission until the matter is settled by the highest
       court. When a commission is appointed to serve as an interim
       Session, its actions are the actions of a Session, not a
       Presbytery. Every commission of a Presbytery or Session
       must submit complete minutes and a report of its activities at
       least once annually to the court which commissioned it.


                                   1335
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        15-3. Presbytery as a whole may hear a case, with or without
        process (BCO 31-38), a reference (BCO 41), an appeal (BCO
        42), a complaint (BCO 43), a BCO 40-5 proceeding, or a
        request to assume original jurisdiction (BCO 33-1) properly
        before it, or it may of its own motion commit such a case to
        a commission. Such a commission shall be appointed by the
        Presbytery from its members other than members of the
        Session of the church from which the case comes up. The
        commission shall try the case in the manner presented by the
        Rules of Discipline and shall submit to the Presbytery a full
        statement of the case and the judgment rendered. The
        judgment of the commission shall be the decision of the
        Presbytery, and the statement of the case and judgment
        printed in its minutes.

RATIONALE:

The current provision in BCO 15 that requires a Presbytery to ratify the
decision of a judicial commission formed under BCO 15-3 is an anomaly
that has been a source of confusion and misapplication by Presbyteries.
Presbyteries have not infrequently violated the BCO 15-3 mandate to
approve or disapprove of the commission’s judgment “without debate.”

BCO 15-3 creates an ecclesiastical commission that is unlike any other
commission. The actions of such a commission are not final and require
ratification. This runs counter to the entire purpose of a commission, which
is to “deliberate upon and conclude the business referred to it” (BCO 15-
1). The amendment standardizes the work of all commissions, regardless
of the appointing court.

If a Presbytery wishes to have final approval in a judicial matter, it may
still do so, by appointing a judicial committee to conduct a trial and report
back to the Presbytery.

Because there can be confusion as to which entity should hear a complaint
against the action of a commission (whether judicial or otherwise), the
amendment makes clear that an ecclesiastical commission should not be
dismissed before the time for a complaint has run (BCO 43-1 and 43-2).

Adopted by Houston Metro Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 11, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Lou Veiga, stated clerk
                                    1336
                               APPENDIX W



OVERTURE 26 from Potomac Presbytery                                 (to OC)
     “Statement On Political Violence”

Whereas, the Presbyterian Church in America has not hesitated to speak
      to pressing moral issues, such as condemning violence against the
      unborn (1978) and abused children (2014), as well as providing
      guidelines for non-violent protest (1988); and
Whereas, God has ordained civil governments to be his “servants” and
      “ministers,” and armed them with the power of the sword to
      enforce justice and maintain order in a fallen world; and that
      Christians are to be subject to the governing authorities, at all
      levels of government (Romans 13:1-7; 1 Peter 2:13; WCF 23.1);
      and
Whereas, the Lord Jesus declared, “blessed are the peacemakers, for they
      shall be called sons of God” (Matthew 5:9); and
Whereas, our Lord commanded his followers to, “love your enemies, do
      good to those who hate you” (Luke 6:27); and
Whereas on the night of his betrayal, Jesus commanded Peter to put away
      his sword, “for all who take the sword will perish by the sword”
      (Matthew 26:52), thus establishing for his Kingdom a spiritual
      means of conquest; and
Whereas, the Apostle Paul exhorted Christians facing opposition in the
      capital of the Roman empire, “if possible, so far as it depends on
      you, live peaceably with all” (Romans 12:18); and
Whereas, the Apostle Paul directed believers, in their speech to those
      outside the church, to speak with wisdom and grace, with words
      thoughtfully adapted to the needs of those who hear (Col. 4:5-6);
      and
Whereas, the Westminster Larger Catechism states the duties required in
      the sixth commandment include “peaceable, mild and courteous
      speeches and behavior, forbearance, readiness to be reconciled,
      patient bearing and forgiving of injuries, and requiting good for
      evil” (WLC 135); and
Whereas, the Westminster Larger Catechism states the sins forbidden in
      the sixth commandment include “all taking away the life of
      ourselves, or of others, except in case of public justice, lawful war,
      or necessary defense; the neglecting or withdrawing the lawful
      and necessary means of preservation of life; sinful anger, hatred,
      envy, desire of revenge; all excessive passions” (WLC 136); and



                                   1337
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Whereas, the spiritual nature of Christ’s kingdom is clearly affirmed in
         the Westminster Confession of Faith (WCF 25.2; 31.4) and the
         Book of Church Order (Preliminary Principles 2.7; 11-2); and
Whereas, the United States has seen an increase in political violence and
         intimidation in recent years, from across the political spectrum,
         including arson, assaults on government buildings, and a growing
         number of personal threats to public officials; and
Whereas, at some of these violent events, Christian symbols have figured
         prominently, causing confusion to a watching world by an
         unhelpful conflation of the Kingdom of Christ with unlawful and
         violent actions; and
Whereas, Christians may be tempted to ignore, excuse, or minimize
         violence that aids their preferred political views; and
Whereas, the Department of Homeland Security, the Federal Bureau of
         Investigation, and other national and state agencies report they are
         anticipating more acts of political violence; and
Whereas, many members of the Presbyterian Church in America have
         served and continue to serve sacrificially in law enforcement and
         the U.S. military, lawfully bearing arms in order to secure the
         blessings of liberty, law, and order in our cities, and the peaceful
         transfer of power, all within the moral obligations of law
         enforcement and just war as declared by lawful authorities (cf.
         WCF 21.2); and
Whereas, the Church should seek the peace of the place God has sent us
         (Jeremiah 29:7) by leading our divided country towards healthy
         civic discourse; and
Whereas, Scripture teaches that servants of the living and reigning God
         must disobey any subordinate authority that directs them to do
         what God has forbidden, or to fail to do what God has required
         (Exodus 1:15-22; Joshua 2; 1 Kings 18.1-15; Daniel 3 and 6; Acts
         5:17-42), and yet Scripture does not warrant private violent
         resistance in such cases;
Therefore, be it resolved, that the 49th General Assembly of the
         Presbyterian Church in America remind our members and
         neighbors of our allegiance to the Prince of Peace, the Lord Jesus
         Christ, as “the sole Head of the Church and Law-giver in Zion”
         (Message to All Churches, 1973); and
Be it further resolved, that the 49th General Assembly of the Presbyterian
         Church in America condemn political violence and intimidation
         in unlawful expressions, especially that which is illicitly done in
         the name of Christ; and
                                    1338
                               APPENDIX W



Be it further resolved, that the Moderator of the 49th General Assembly
         of the Presbyterian Church in America appoint a commissioner to
         pray for peace in our nation and that the Church of Jesus Christ
         would be instruments of that peace; and
Be it finally resolved, that the 49th General Assembly of the Presbyterian
         Church in America encourage her members to “seek peace and
         pursue it” in the public square (Psalm 34:14); to “be subject to the
         governing authorities” (Romans 13:1); and to pray for peace and
         for “all who are in high positions, that we may lead a peaceful and
         quiet life, godly and dignified in every way.” (I Timothy 2:2).

Adopted by Potomac Presbytery at its stated meeting, March 19, 2022
Attested by /s/s RE Charles D. Robinson stated clerk


OVERTURE 27 from Potomac Presbytery                 (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 15-1 and 15-3 To Clarify Role of Presbytery
     Commission”

[Note: This overture is identical to Overture 25.]

Be it resolved that BCO 15-1 and 15-3 be amended as follows (strike-through
        for deletions, underlining for new wording):

        15-1. A commission differs from an ordinary committee in
        that while a committee is appointed to examine, consider and
        report, a commission is authorized to deliberate upon and
        conclude the business referred to it, except in the case of
        judicial commissions of a Presbytery appointed under BCO
        15-3. A commission shall keep a full record of its
        proceedings, which shall be submitted to the court appointing
        it. Upon such submission this record shall be entered on the
        minutes of the court appointing, the date of the submission
        being the date of “the meeting of the court” for the filing
        requirements of a complaint under BCO 43-2. except in the
        case of a presbytery commission serving as a session or a
        judicial commission as set forth in BCO 15-3. The effective
        date of dismissal of a commission of session or presbytery
        shall be not before the time allowed for the filing of a
        complaint or appeal against that commission’s decision has
        expired. Any complaint or appeal so timely filed, shall be
                                    1339
             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   adjudicated by that commission until the matter is settled by
   the highest court. When a commission is appointed to serve
   as an interim Session, its actions are the actions of a Session,
   not a Presbytery. Every commission of a Presbytery or
   Session must submit complete minutes and a report of its
   activities at least once annually to the court which
   commissioned it.

   15-3. Presbytery as a whole may try a judicial case within
   its jurisdiction (including the right to refer any strictly
   constitutional issue to a study committee with options listed
   below), hear a case, with or without process (BCO 31-38), a
   reference (BCO 41), an appeal (BCO 42), a complaint (BCO
   43), a BCO 40-5 proceeding, or a request to assume original
   jurisdiction (BCO 33-1) properly before it, or it may of its
   own motion commit any judicial such a case to a
   commission. Such a commission shall be appointed by the
   Presbytery from its members other than members of the
   Session of the church from which the case comes up. The
   commission shall try the case in the manner presented by the
   Rules of Discipline and shall submit to the Presbytery a full
   statement of the case and the judgment rendered. The
   Presbytery without debate shall approve or disapprove of the
   judgment, or may refer, (a debatable motion), any strictly
   constitutional issue(s) to a study committee. In case of
   referral, the Presbytery shall either dismiss some or all of the
   specific charges raised in the case or decide the case only
   after the report of the study committee has been heard and
   discussed. If Presbytery approves, the The judgment of the
   commission shall be final and shall be entered on the minutes
   of Presbytery as the action the decision of the Presbytery, and
   the statement of the case and judgment printed in its minutes.
   If Presbytery disapproves, it shall hear the case as a whole,
   or appoint a new commission to hear the case again.

So that BCO 15-1 and 15-3, as amended, would read:

   15-1. A commission differs from an ordinary committee in
   that while a committee is appointed to examine, consider and
   report, a commission is authorized to deliberate upon and
   conclude the business referred to it. A commission shall
                               1340
                             APPENDIX W



       keep a full record of its proceedings, which shall be
       submitted to the court appointing it. Upon such submission
       this record shall be entered on the minutes of the court
       appointing, the date of the submission being the date of “the
       meeting of the court” for the filing requirements of a
       complaint under BCO 43-2. The effective date of dismissal
       of a commission of session or presbytery shall be not before
       the time allowed for the filing of a complaint or appeal
       against that commission’s decision has expired. Any
       complaint or appeal so timely filed, shall be adjudicated by
       that commission until the matter is settled by the highest
       court. When a commission is appointed to serve as an interim
       Session, its actions are the actions of a Session, not a
       Presbytery. Every commission of a Presbytery or Session
       must submit complete minutes and a report of its activities at
       least once annually to the court which commissioned it.

       15-3. Presbytery as a whole may hear a case, with or
       without process (BCO 31-38), a reference (BCO 41), an
       appeal (BCO 42), a complaint (BCO 43), a BCO 40-5
       proceeding, or a request to assume original jurisdiction (BCO
       33-1) properly before it, or it may of its own motion commit
       such a case to a commission. Such a commission shall be
       appointed by the Presbytery from its members other than
       members of the Session of the church from which the case
       comes up. The commission shall try the case in the manner
       presented by the Rules of Discipline and shall submit to the
       Presbytery a full statement of the case and the judgment
       rendered. The judgment of the commission shall be the
       decision of the Presbytery, and the statement of the case and
       judgment printed in its minutes.

RATIONALE:
The current provision in BCO 15 that requires a Presbytery to ratify the
decision of a judicial commission formed under BCO 15-3 is an anomaly
that has been a source of confusion and misapplication by Presbyteries.
Presbyteries have not infrequently violated the BCO 15-3 mandate to
approve or disapprove of the commission’s judgment “without debate.”

BCO 15-3 creates an ecclesiastical commission that is unlike any other
commission. The actions of such a commission are not final and require
                                  1341
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



ratification. This runs counter to the entire purpose of a commission, which
is to “deliberate upon and conclude the business referred to it” (BCO 15-1).
The amendment standardizes the work of all commissions, regardless of
the appointing court.

If a Presbytery wishes to have final approval in a judicial matter, it may
still do so, by appointing a judicial committee to conduct a trial and report
back to the Presbytery.

Because there can be confusion as to which entity should hear a complaint
against the action of a commission (whether judicial or otherwise), the
amendment makes clear that an ecclesiastical commission should not be
dismissed before the time for a complaint has run (BCO 43-1 and 43-2).

Approved by Potomac Presbytery at its stated meeting, March 19, 2022
Attested by /s/ RE Charles D. Robinson, stated clerk


OVERTURE 28 from Pittsburgh Presbytery        (to CCB, OC, and to
                                                  MNA for advice)
        “Amend BCO 8-7 by Adding Chaplain Endorsement
        Requirements and Recommendations”

Whereas, the presbytery has under its care teaching elders and candidates
      for the ministry (examine, license, receive, dismiss, ordain, install,
      remove, and judge) (BCO 13.9); and
Whereas, the Sixth General Assembly of the PCA (1978) approved the
      establishment of the Presbyterian and Reformed Commission on
      Chaplains and Military Personnel (PRCCMP or PRCC) and
      assigned the duties of examination, endorsement, and oversight of
      chaplains through the PRCCMP to Mission to North America; and
Whereas, endorsement verifies a denomination has at a minimum utilized
      a process to address the following core standards with each
      endorsee: ministerial and theological competence, good standing
      and accountability within the denomination, ability to minister
      within diverse and pluralistic settings, and willingness of the
      endorsee to maintain communication and theological
      accountability to the denomination and the endorsing agent; and
Whereas, endorsement is a credential requirement that establishes the
      legal and ecclesiastical oversight of those chaplains hired for all
      federal government chaplain positions and many other
      organizations who educate, certify, or hire chaplains; and
                                    1342
                                APPENDIX W



Whereas, the role of MNA Chaplain Ministries and the PRCC is not well
        known in all presbyteries, and PCA military chaplains have sought
        endorsement through other agencies not authorized by the General
        Assembly for such purpose; and
Whereas, the only Department of Defense approved Ecclesiastical
        Endorser that can insure PCA Presbyteries that their Chaplains
        have the freedom to preach and teach the Word and can assure that
        they will have full freedom to maintain and teach the doctrine of
        our Church is the only one authorized by and under the authority
        of the PCA General Assembly (see proposed BCO 8-7 addition
        below); and
Whereas, the PRCC may be seen in the same light as the work of MTW’s
        (Mission to the World’s) role with denomination missionaries
        (serving under other organizations), this is not the same as
        religious liberty issues for chaplains at the Federal, State, and local
        level. Those issues fall outside the church within the sphere of
        secular society that require timely and accurate information and
        action the PRCC has garnered and applied for over forty-years;
        and
Whereas, many of the organizations a teaching elder may serve with as a
        chaplain (military or civilian, paid or volunteer) fall outside the
        jurisdiction of a Presbytery, let it be known that MNA Chaplain
        Ministries through the PRCC is the Reformed subject matter
        expert on Chaplaincy, and is, therefore, best able to assist
        Presbyteries in extending ecclesiastical care over its ministers who
        are chaplains;
Therefore, be it resolved that BCO 8-7 be amended by adding the
underlined paragraph below:

        BCO 8-7
        A teaching elder requiring an ecclesiastical endorsement to
        serve as a chaplain (e.g., military chaplains) after the
        presbytery’s approval shall be endorsed through the
        denomination’s endorsing agency authorized by the General
        Assembly for such purpose. Teaching elders ministering as
        paid or volunteer chaplains not requiring ecclesiastical
        endorsement are highly encouraged to seek and obtain the
        same endorsement.

So that BCO 8-7 as amended would read:


                                     1343
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        8-7.     A Presbytery may, at its discretion, approve the call
        of a teaching elder to work with an organization outside the
        jurisdiction of the Presbyterian Church in America, provided
        that he be engaged in preaching and teaching the Word, that
        the Presbytery be assured he will have full freedom to
        maintain and teach the doctrine of our Church, and that he
        report at least annually on his work. As far as possible, such
        a teaching elder shall be a member of the Presbytery within
        whose bounds he labors. (See BCO 20-1.)
                 A teaching elder requiring an ecclesiastical
        endorsement to serve as a chaplain (e.g., military chaplains)
        after the presbytery’s approval shall be endorsed through the
        denomination’s endorsing agency authorized by the General
        Assembly for such purpose. Teaching elders ministering as
        paid or volunteer chaplains not requiring ecclesiastical
        endorsement are highly encouraged to seek and obtain the
        same endorsement.

Adopted by Pittsburgh Presbytery at its stated Meeting April 2, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE LeRoy Capper, Stated Clerk


OVERTURE 29 from Pittsburgh Presbytery            (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding 16-4 Regarding Qualifications
     for Church Office”
Whereas, our churches are under continual pressure to conform to the
      standards of the world on sexuality, and Christians in our churches
      often use the language of the world in minimizing or maximizing
      certain sin patterns, and
Whereas, the documents of the PCA should, as much as possible, have a
      timeless character that transcends the specific issues in one
      particular day, and
Whereas, a previous overture on this topic was passed at General
      Assembly, and there is wide support for the spirit of that overture,
      but substantial disagreement on the precision of the language, as
      well as concern that it is overly connected to current terminology
      of our society, and
Whereas, there is widespread agreement on the language of the Report by
      the Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality, and



                                   1344
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, the spirit of our Standards (e.g., WCF XV:4) is not to single out
       any category of sin as especially separate from all other types of
       sin (such as homosexuality or racism, in different eras) but to
       enjoin us to ongoing repentance of all types of sin, and
Whereas, there is substantial debate as to whether some officers in the
       PCA use identification with certain categories of sin as a way of
       downplaying the need for a complete and full sanctification in
       those areas, which must include repentance not just from the outward
       practice of sins but also from the inward desire for those sins;
Therefore be it resolved that a new paragraph 16-4 be added to BCO 16,
       which shall read as follows:
        16-4 Officers in the Presbyterian Church in America must
        be above reproach in their walk and Christlike in their
        character. Those who deny the sinfulness of fallen desires, or
        who deny the reality and hope of progressive sanctification,
        or who fail to pursue Spirit-empowered victory over their
        sinful temptations, inclinations, and actions are not qualified
        for ordained office. Our standard of conduct is always the
        Word of God, which transcends any culture; whether a sin is
        especially hated or excused in a particular society shall
        neither excuse those who are unrepentant nor bar those who
        are clearly repentant.
Adopted by Pittsburgh Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 2, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE LeRoy S. Capper, stated clerk


OVERTURE 30 from Pittsburgh Presbytery                 (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 6-5, 20-3, 25-1, and 24-3, Allowing
     Congregations to Establish Voting Age Restrictions”

Whereas, there is vagueness in the BCO that can lead to a discrepancy in
      practice within the PCA on when and how children should be
      welcomed into communicant membership of the covenant
      community of God’s people; and
Whereas, covenant children should be encouraged to profess faith in
      Christ and their need for him from an early age, and
Whereas, it is the duty of the church, the people of God, to assist in the
      nurture and admonition of our covenant children, and
Whereas, the Lord’s Supper is a means of grace given by our Lord Jesus
      Christ for “spiritual nourishment and growth in grace; have their
      union and communion with him confirmed; testify and renew their

                                   1345
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       thankfulness, and engagement to God, and their mutual love and
       fellowship each with other, as members of the same mystical
       body” (WLC 168), and
Whereas, Jesus said “Let the little children come to me, do not hinder
       them...” (Matt. 19:14), and
Whereas, our covenant children who have professed a faith of their own
       should not be hindered in coming to the table of our Lord Jesus,
       and
Whereas, the Church has historically equated physical, emotional, and
       mental development with spiritual development, and
Whereas, our Lord Jesus Christ, the second person of the Trinity, fully
       God and fully man, sinless in all his ways, spiritually mature from
       birth, had to “increase in wisdom and in stature and in favor with
       God and man” (Luke 2:52), and
Whereas, the practice of allowing all communicant members to vote in
       congregational matters has not been shown by past General
       Assemblies to be rooted in either scripture or in our confessional
       language; and
Whereas, it is our denomination’s stated goal to root our faith and practice
       in the Scripture; and
Whereas, there is strong Reformed tradition limiting voting to those “with
       authority,” i.e. heads of households; and
Whereas, a similar overture was approved by the 24th General Assembly,
       approved by more than 2/3 of the Presbyteries, yet failed to be
       adopted by the 25th General Assembly, and
Whereas, congregational voting on corporate matters requires a legal age
       of 18 or higher in some states; and
Whereas, the BCO allows all communicant members to vote on non-
       corporation issues even if they are younger than the legal age; and
Whereas, the BCO states that “It is expressly recognized that each local
       congregation or local church shall be competent to function and to
       take actions covering the matters set forth herein as long as such
       action is in compliance with the civil laws with which said local
       congregation or local church must comply, and this right shall
       never be taken from said local congregation or local church
       without the express consent of and affirmative action of such local
       church or congregation” (BCO 25-11);
Therefore be it resolved that the 49th General Assembly of the
       Presbyterian Church in America allow individual congregations
       the freedom to establish minimum voting ages for ecclesiastical
       and corporate votes by making the following changes to the BCO:

                                   1346
                       APPENDIX W



1. Add a new paragraph 5 to BCO 6 as follows:
   6-5. A congregation may, at its discretion by a vote of
   2/3, set the minimum voting age for its communing
   members, provided it is not greater than eighteen (18)
   years of age. The congregation may also; at its
   discretion, set a different minimum voting age for
   different matters provided it is not greater than eighteen
   (18) years of age.

2. Amend the last sentence in BCO 20-3 as follows (strike-
   through for deletion, underlining for new wording:
   20-3. When a congregation is convened for the
   election of a pastor it is important that they should elect
   a minister of the Presbyterian Church in America to
   preside, but if this be impracticable, they may elect any
   male member of that church. The Session shall appoint
   one of their number to call the meeting to order and to
   preside until the congregation shall elect their presiding
   officer. All communing members in good and regular
   standing, Communing members in good and regular
   standing who have the right to vote (BCO 6-5), but no
   others, are entitled to vote in the churches to which they
   are respectively attached.

    so that BCO 20-3 reads as follows:

    20-3. When a congregation is convened for the
    election of a pastor it is important that they should elect
    a minister of the Presbyterian Church in America to
    preside, but if this be impracticable, they may elect any
    male member of that church. The Session shall appoint
    one of their number to call the meeting to order and to
    preside until the congregation shall elect their presiding
    officer. Communing members in good and regular
    standing who have the right to vote (BCO 6-5), but no
    others, are entitled to vote in the churches to which they
    are respectively attached.

3. Modify by deletion and addition BCO 25-1 as follows:
   25-1. The congregation consists of all the communing
   members of a particular church, and they but only those
   given the right to vote (BCO 6-5) are entitled to vote.
                           1347
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            So that the new BCO 25-1 reads as follows:

            25-1. The congregation consists of all the communing
            members of a particular church, but only those given the
            right to vote (BCO 6-5) are entitled to vote.

        4. Modify by deletion and addition BCO 24-3 as follows:
           24-3. All cCommuning members in good and regular
           standing, but no others, are entitled to vote in the election
           of church officers in the churches to which they
           respectively belong. However, the congregation may, at
           its discretion, set the minimum voting age for its
           members (BCO 6-5). A majority vote of those present is
           required for election. (See also BCO 20-3.)

            So that the new BCO 24-3 reads as follows:
            24-3. Communing members in good and regular
            standing, but no others, are entitled to vote in the election
            of church officers in the churches to which they
            respectively belong. However, the congregation may, at
            its discretion, set the minimum voting age for its
            members (BCO 6-5). A majority vote of those present is
            required for election. (See also BCO 20-3.)

Adopted by Pittsburgh Presbytery at its stated meeting of April 2, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE LeRoy S. Capper, stated clerk


OVERTURE 31 from Pittsburgh Presbytery            (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 21-4 and 24-1 by Adding Paragraphs Regarding
     Requirements for Ordination”

Whereas, the moral character of an officer is of highest importance in
      Scripture, and not merely theological orthodoxy, and
Whereas, there is great danger to the church if officers of the church
      practice sins in secret which are scandalous, and
Whereas, in our society there is an epidemic of sexual temptation in
      particular, which affects all people, and
Whereas, leadership in the church may bring increased temptation as the
      Devil seeks to destroy those who preach the Word, and
Whereas, some churches have brought shame on the Body of Christ by
      appearing to hide and tolerate certain types of sin in their
      leadership, and
                                    1348
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, a uniform standard of examination should be the practice of our
       denomination, and
Whereas, a previous overture on this topic was passed at General
       Assembly, and there is wide support for the spirit of that overture,
       but substantial disagreement on the precision of the language,
       which could be taken as discouraging men from confessing their
       sins, and
Whereas, there is substantial concern that some officers of our
       denomination by confessing their sins and sin temptations
       publicly may do more harm than good, giving the impression that
       certain types of sins or sin temptation are not really so bad,
Therefore be it resolved that
       1. BCO 21-4 be amended by addition of a new sub-paragraph
           21-4.e (with subsequent sub-paragraphs 21-4.e-h being
           relettered to be 21-4.f-i), which shall read as follows:
           21-4. Ordination Requirements and Procedures
                    e. In the examination of the candidate’s
                        personal character, the presbytery shall give
                        specific attention to potential notorious
                        concerns. Careful attention must be given to
                        his practical struggle against sinful actions, as
                        well as to persistent sinful desires. The
                        candidate must give clear testimony of
                        reliance upon his union with Christ and the
                        benefits thereof by the Holy Spirit, depending
                        on this work of grace to make progress over
                        sin (Psalm 103:2-5, Romans 8:29) and to bear
                        fruit (Psalm 1:3, Gal. 5:22-23). While
                        imperfection will remain, when confessing
                        sins and sinful temptations publicly, officers
                        of the church must exercise great care to not
                        normalize those sins in the eyes of the
                        congregation, as though they were matters of
                        little consequence, but rather should testify to
                        the work of the Holy Spirit in Christ Jesus in
                        changing our sin nature (1 Cor. 6:9-11). In
                        order to maintain discretion and protect the
                        honor of the pastoral office, presbyteries are
                        encouraged to empower a committee to



                                   1349
         MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



               conduct detailed examinations of these
               matters and to give prayerful support to
               candidates.

2. BCO 24-1 be amended by the addition of a new second
   paragraph which shall read as follows:
   24-1 (following 24-1.a-e)
           In the examination of each nominee’s personal
           character, the Session shall give specific attention
           to potential notorious concerns. Careful attention
           must be given to his practical struggle against
           sinful actions, as well as to persistent sinful
           desires. The candidate must give clear testimony
           of reliance upon his union with Christ and the
           benefits thereof by the Holy Spirit, depending on
           this work of grace to make progress over sin
           (Psalm 103:2-5, Romans 8:29) and to bear fruit
           (Psalm 1:3, Gal. 5:22-23). While imperfection
           will remain, when confessing sins and sinful
           temptations publicly, officers of the church must
           exercise great care to not normalize those sins in
           the eyes of the congregation, as though they were
           matters of little consequence, but rather should
           testify to the work of the Holy Spirit in Christ
           Jesus in changing our sin nature (1 Cor. 6:9-11).
           In order to maintain discretion and protect the
           honor of church office, Sessions may empower a
           committee to conduct detailed examinations of
           these matters and to give prayerful support to
           nominees.

The amended BCO 24-1 shall thus read as follows:
   24-1. Every church shall elect persons to the offices of
          ruling elder and deacon in the following manner:
          At such times as determined by the Session,
          communicant members of the congregation may
          submit names to the Session, keeping in mind that
          each prospective officer should be an active male
          member who meets the qualifications set forth in
          1 Timothy 3 and Titus 1. After the close of the
          nomination period nominees for the office of
                         1350
          APPENDIX W



ruling elder and/or deacon shall receive
instruction in the qualifications and work of the
office. Each nominee shall then be examined in:
a. his Christian experience, especially his
     personal character and family management
     (based on the qualifications set out in 1
     Timothy 3:1-7 and Titus 1:6-9),
b. his knowledge of Bible content,
c. his knowledge of the system of doctrine,
     government, discipline contained in the
     Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in
     America (BCO Preface III, The Constitution
     Defined),
d. the duties of the office to which he has been
     nominated, and
e. his willingness to give assent to the questions
    required for ordination. (BCO 24-6)
     In the examination of each nominee’s
personal character, the Session shall give specific
attention to potential notorious concerns. Careful
attention must be given to his practical struggle
against sinful actions, as well as to persistent
sinful desires. The candidate must give clear
testimony of reliance upon his union with Christ
and the benefits thereof by the Holy Spirit,
depending on this work of grace to make progress
over sin (Psalm 103:2-5, Romans 8:29) and to
bear fruit (Psalm 1:3, Gal. 5:22-23). While
imperfection will remain, when confessing sins
and sinful temptations publicly, officers of the
church must exercise great care to not normalize
those sins in the eyes of the congregation, as
though they were matters of little consequence,
but rather should testify to the work of the Holy
Spirit in Christ Jesus in changing our sin nature
(1 Cor. 6:9-11). In order to maintain discretion
and protect the honor of church office, Sessions
may empower a committee to conduct detailed
examinations of these matters and to give
prayerful support to nominees.


              1351
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                        If there are candidates eligible for the
                    election, the Session shall report to the
                    congregation those eligible, giving at least thirty
                    (30) days prior notice of the time and place of a
                    congregational meeting for elections.
                        If one-fourth (1/4) of the persons entitled to
                    vote shall at any time request the Session to call a
                    congregational meeting for the purpose of
                    electing additional officers, it shall be the duty of
                    the Session to call such a meeting on the above
                    procedure. The number of officers to be elected
                    shall be determined by the congregation after
                    hearing the Session’s recommendation.

Adopted by Pittsburgh Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 2, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE LeRoy S. Capper, stated clerk


OVERTURE 32 from Tennessee Valley Presbytery       (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend RAO 8.4 to Add an Item to the Annual Report
     of the GA Nominating Committee”

Whereas Article VI of the PCA Corporate Bylaws stipulates that the five
      denominational agency Boards may ask presbyteries to nominate
      specific men for their Boards, and then, if so nominated, the
      Boards may recommend and endorse these men to the GA
      Nominating Committee (“NC”). Below is the pertinent excerpt
      from the PCA Bylaws, which is essentially the same sentence for
      each of the five Boards:

            The Board may make requests to the Presbyteries to
            nominate specific men to the Board and may submit to the
            Assembly      Nominating      Committee     letters   of
            recommendation concerning particular nominees from
            the presbyteries.
and
Whereas the five Boards oversee separate corporations:

            Bylaw Article V.G. Boards of Agencies - When it is
            necessary for the handling of civil matters, the General
            Assembly may authorize one of its committees or
                                   1352
                               APPENDIX W



            agencies to incorporate and to form a board. The
            relationship of the board to the Assembly remains as a
            committee, and the provisions of the corporation charter
            and bylaws shall be in conformity with the constitution of
            the Church.
and
Whereas the NC is not obligated to nominate the presbytery nominees
      recommended by these five Boards, but it would be helpful for the
      GA to know who those men are. The letters sent by these Boards
      to the NC are not confidential. In keeping with the NC Operations
      Manual, these letters are included in the “Rainbow Book” given
      to NC members, which includes all the nomination forms
      submitted by the presbyteries; and
Whereas the NC Operations Manual, Part 1 Section 2.a, stipulates three
      criteria the NC should consider in making its nominations:
           (a) The qualifications of each candidate recommended by the
                Presbyteries,
           (b) The needs of the individual committees, agencies, and
                commissions,
           (c) A proportionate representation of all Presbyteries, wherever
                possible (BCO 14-1.9)
      It is reasonable to understand this as a priority sequence, i.e.,
      qualification is paramount, followed by the needs of the
      committees or agencies, and lastly, proportional presbytery
      representation. And ordinarily, it is reasonable to assume the
      Committees and Boards are the best judges of their needs. For
      example, here is the first paragraph from the College Board’s
      February 1 letter to the NC this year:

        The Board of Trustees of Covenant College is once again
        appreciative of the privilege we are afforded as an agency to
        propose to you a slate of nominees for election as Trustees. The
        Governance Committee of the Board of Trustees works
        throughout the year to identify and vet teaching and ruling
        elders who are well qualified to serve in this role. In addition
        to screening potential candidates by considering their
        commitment to the Westminster Standards and to Christian
        higher education, the Governance Committee also considers
        the candidates’ capacity to govern wisely, the individual gifts
        and experiences they might bring to College, and the makeup
        of the Board as a whole. Therefore, the Committee takes into
                                   1353
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        consideration matters such as presbytery representation,
        geographical representation, teaching and ruling elder mix,
        board experience, ethnic diversity, and unique gifts and
        expertise that candidates might bring.
and
Whereas the PCA Bylaw provisions for these five Boards include some
      unique features compared to the nine GA Permanent & Special
      Committees for which NC also presents nominees. For example:

        −   These five Boards are not subject to any requirement for
            mathematically equal representation of Teaching and
            Ruling Elders (i.e., not subject to the requirement of BCO
            14-1.10). The College Board currently has 11 TEs & 17
            REs, the Seminary has 7+17, the Foundation has 3+7, RBI
            has 3+9, and Ridge Haven has 4+6.

        −   The RBI and Foundation Boards can include PCA
            deacons.

        −   The College Board has 28 members and the Seminary
            Board and can have between 12 and 32 members. There
            is no required formula for dividing the members of a class
            between teaching and ruling elders. Both Boards can
            include up to four men from denominations with which
            the PCA is in ecclesiastical fellowship (one in each class)
            and can have an additional two members from a
            NAPARC member denomination.

        −   NC members might not be familiar, for example, with
            PCA deacons recommended by the Boards of RBI and the
            Foundation, or with any non-PCA teaching and ruling
            elders recommended by the Boards of the College and
            Seminary.
and
Whereas it would be a simple task to add to the annual NC Report the list
      of presbytery nominees recommended by the five Boards. It might
      only require an additional half-page; and
Whereas it might also help for the NC to identify, on the preliminary
      results currently used by NC internally, which of the presbytery
      nominees have also been recommended and endorsed by the five
      Boards. While the Rainbow Book ordinarily contains the Board
                                   1354
                               APPENDIX W



        letters, this annotation would put this important information in an
        appropriately prominent place, given the prerogative granted to
        the agency Boards to make these recommendations.
Therefore, be it resolved to amend RAO 8-4 by adding the sentence
underlined below:

        8-4. Nominating Committee: The Assembly’s Nominating
        Committee shall operate under the following guidelines:..

           h. The committee shall present its nominations to the
              Assembly through the Commissioner Handbook or
              Supplement. This presentation shall include a brief
              statement regarding each nominee. The Report shall
              also include a list of the presbytery nominees who were
              recommended by the Boards of Covenant College,
              Covenant Seminary, PCA Foundation, RBI and Ridge
              Haven. (See PCA Corporate Bylaws, Article VI.)

Approved by Tennessee Valley Presbytery on April 9, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Jacob A. Bennett, stated clerk


OVERTURE 33 from Nashville Presbytery                              (to OC)
     “Use Human Sexuality Report for Study, Examination,
     and Conciliation”

Whereas: In this time of confusion in the culture, and among Christians,
      about issues related to human sexuality, the Presbyterian Church
      in America has been encouraged to make a clear statement about
      qualifications for ordained office; and
Whereas: The Westminster Standards clearly state in Larger Catechism
      Question 139 that both same-sex sexual activity and same-sex
      desire are violations of God’s law; and
Whereas: The 47th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
      America approved the constitutionality of BCO 59-3, which states,
      “Marriage is only to be between one man and one woman (Gen.
      2:24,25; Matt. 19:4-6, 1 Cor. 7:2), in accordance with the Word of
      God. Therefore, ministers in the Presbyterian Church in America
      who solemnize marriages shall only solemnize marriages between
      one man and one woman;” and


                                   1355
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Whereas: BCO 21-4.c states that trials for the ordination of ministers,
      “shall consist of: (1) A careful examination as to: (a) his
      acquaintance with experiential religion, especially his personal
      character and family management (based on the qualifications set
      out in 1 Timothy 3:1-7, and Titus 1:6-9),” and BCO 24-1 states
      that each elder or deacon nominee “shall then be examined in: a.
      his Christian experience, especially his personal character and
      family management (based on the qualifications set out in 1
      Timothy 3:1-7 and Titus 1:6-9);” and
Whereas: The 48th General Assembly of the PCA declared the Report of
      the Ad interim Committee on Human Sexuality (AIC) as “a
      biblically faithful declaration.” And, the grounds Calvary
      Presbytery unanimously adopted in sending up the overture stated,
      “The PCA ‘Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Human
      Sexuality,’ is a biblically faithful work by gifted churchmen
      within the PCA. It is a most useful resource concerning the
      apologetic and pastoral task surrounding gender and sexuality
      confusion within the PCA and the broader culture.” and;
Whereas: The grounds adopted by the Committee of Commissioners on
      the Committee on Discipleship Ministries stated, “The report of
      the ad interim on Human Sexuality is an excellent resource for
      members and churches who seek to understand the biblical,
      confessional, and pastoral issues involved with addressing the
      topics of homosexuality, same-sex attraction, and transgenderism;”
      and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates the confessional doctrine of sin and
      temptation in relation to Same-Sex Attraction (SSA) in Statements
      3-6 (p. 7-10) and in its section on “Confessional Foundations” (pp.
      14-23), stating, “‘actual’ sin refers not to the reality or non-reality
      of sin, but to its being an act of the soul as opposed to a disposition
      or inclination only. While it is significant that a distinction is made
      between original and actual sin, the emphasis at this point in the
      Confession is that original sin, as a disposition or inclination, is
      truly sin,” (p. 14, line 39-p. 15, line 3), and “when the temptation
      arises from within, it is our own act and is rightly called sin,” (p.
      9, lines 18-19); and the AIC clearly articulates the confessional
      view of sin and temptation, clarifying that, “There are some
      temptations God gives us in the form of morally neutral trials, and
      other temptations God never gives us because they arise from
      within as morally illicit desires (James 1:2, 13-14). When
      temptations come from without, the temptation itself is not sin,
                                   1356
                               APPENDIX W



      unless we enter into the temptation. But when the temptation
      arises from within, it is our own act and is rightly called sin.
      Nevertheless, there is an important degree of moral difference
      between temptation to sin and giving in to sin, even when the
      temptation is itself an expressing of indwelling sin.” (AIC p. 9,
      lines 14-22); and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates the confessional doctrine of
      sanctification in relation to SSA in Statement 7 (p. 10) and in its
      sections on “Real Change” (p. 22), “Celebrating Sincere Efforts”
      (p. 23), and “Discipleship for Believers Experiencing Same-Sex
      Attraction” (p. 24-25), stating, “to teach that our sinful corruption
      must be entirely removed from any part of us in order to be
      considered truly repentant is a spiritually treacherous perversion
      of the doctrine of repentance,” (p. 22, lines 24-26), and “Someone
      with homosexual attraction ought not close himself or herself off
      to the pursuit of, and hope of, real change in those attractions, even
      if that change is incomplete and mixed,” (p. 22, lines 38-40); and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates the confessional doctrine of
      repentance in relation to SSA in Statement 12 (p. 12-13) and in its
      section on “Confessional Foundations” (pp. 14-23), stating,
      “Where we have mistreated those who struggle with same-sex
      attraction, or with any other sinful desires, we call ourselves to
      repentance. Where we have nurtured or made peace with sinful
      thoughts, desires, words, or deeds, we call ourselves to
      repentance,” (p. 12 lines 37-40), and, “We give thanks for penitent
      believers who, though they continue to struggle with same-sex
      attraction, are living lives of chastity and obedience. These
      brothers and sisters can serve as courageous examples of faith and
      faithfulness, as they pursue Christ with a long obedience in gospel
      dependence,” (p. 13, lines 2-5); and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates a confessional approach to
      terminology with regard to sexual identity and orientation in
      relation to SSA in Statements 9-10 (p. 11-12) and in its section on
      “The Christian’s Identity” (pp. 26-31), stating, “Insofar as the
      term orientation is used descriptively to articulate a particular set
      of experiences, namely the persistent and predominant sexual
      attractions of an individual, it can remain useful as a way of
      classifying those experiences in contrast to the experiences of the
      majority of other people. However, insofar as the term orientation
      carries with it a set of assumptions about the nature of that
      experience that is unbiblical (e.g., overemphasized rigidity, its
                                   1357
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



      normativity, etc.), then the terminology may require qualification
      or even rejection in some circumstances,” (p. 30, line 42-p. 31,
      line 4); and
Whereas: The AIC further addresses the issue of terminology on pages
      29-30, stating, “We should choose our language carefully with the
      goal that it expresses the truth and communicates clearly and
      winsomely in our particular context… language itself is a
      secondary issue relative to the doctrine it expresses. Sometimes
      there are disagreements about language even when the underlying
      doctrinal commitments seem to be the same. Thus, while doctrinal
      truth is rightly understood as obligating our affirmation, issues
      around terminology are more properly understood as issues of
      wisdom, necessitating careful Scriptural and pastoral guidance,”
      (p. 29, lines 11-17). While the AIC does not forbid use of the term
      “gay,” it still issues caution stating, “the word gay is not a neutral
      word in our cultural discourse, and Christians should be mindful
      of these dynamics when considering use of the term,” (p. 30, lines
      7-8). Of the term “Gay Christian,” the AIC states, “we believe it
      is generally unwise to use the language of gay Christian,” (p. 30,
      lines 28-29). On both terms “gay” and “gay Christian” the report
      concludes, “we would do well to seek understanding before
      imparting advice. In practical and plain terms, the issue of
      terminology is more likely a matter for shepherding in wisdom,
      and not in and of itself grounds for discipline;” (p. 30, lines 36-
      39); and
Whereas: The AIC sets clear boundaries for ordained office in the PCA,
      stating, “Insofar as such persons display the requisite Christian
      maturity, we do not consider this sin struggle automatically to
      disqualify someone for leadership in the church (1 Cor. 6:9-11, 1
      Tim. 3:1-7, Titus 1:6-9; 2 Pet. 1:3-11), (p. 31, lines 29-31)”; and
Whereas: All those in leadership in our churches should remember that
      the Westminster Standards clearly state in Larger Catechism
      Question 144 that “The duties required in the Ninth
      Commandment are, the preserving and promoting of truth
      between man and man, and the good name of our neighbor, as well
      as our own; appearing and standing for the truth;…a charitable
      esteem of our neighbors; loving, desiring, and rejoicing in their
      good name; sorrowing for, and covering of their infirmities; freely
      acknowledging of their gifts and graces, defending their
      innocency; a ready receiving of a good report, and unwillingness
      to admit of an evil report, concerning them; discouraging
                                   1358
                               APPENDIX W



       talebearers, flatterers, and slanderers;” and Larger Catechism
       Question 145 states that “The sins forbidden in the Ninth
       Commandment are, all prejudicing the truth, and the good name
       of our neighbors, as well as our own, especially in public
       judicature…speaking the truth unseasonably, or maliciously to a
       wrong end, or perverting it to a wrong meaning, or in doubtful and
       equivocal expressions, to the prejudice of truth or justice;
       speaking untruth, lying, slandering, backbiting, detracting, tale
       bearing, whispering, scoffing, reviling, rash, harsh, and partial
       censuring; misconstructing intentions, words, and actions;...raising
       false rumors, receiving and countenancing evil reports, and
       stopping our ears against just defense; evil suspicion;” and
Whereas: CDM has already published the AIC report in book form for
       easy distribution (https://www.pcabookstore.com/p-6275893-a-
       body-for-the-lordpca-papers-on-human-sexuality.aspx), and the
       PCA History website has all PCA studies available for easy
       download:           (https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/digest/studies
       /2021_human_sexuality_report.pdf).
Therefore, be it resolved:
       A. That the 49th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
           in America advises all presbyteries and sessions to:
           1. Fulfill the duty to “give due and serious consideration”
                (BCO 14-7) by making careful study of the 2021 Ad
                interim Report on Human Sexuality,
           2. Consider requiring all candidates for ordained office to do
                the same, and
           3. Utilize said report as a guide in examining the personal
                character of candidates for ordained office (BCO 21-4,
                24-1); and
       B. Be it further resolved: that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America advises the courts of the
           church not to use certain terms as mere ‘litmus tests’ for
           biblical faithfulness or grounds for discipline but to seek
           understanding before imparting advice, in keeping with the
           2021 Ad interim Report on Human Sexuality's statements on
           terminology (p. 29-30), and the Biblical teaching (e.g. Rom 6-
           8; Col 3, 2 Cor 5:17) on how believers are to understand,
           define, and describe themselves in union with Christ as it
           relates to Christian identity (AIC Statement 9, p. 11); and
       C. Be it further resolved: that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America, in keeping with Westminster
           Larger Catechism 144 and 145, urges pastors and elders to de-
                                   1359
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



           escalate the contentious nature of discourse surrounding
           issues of human sexuality and identity, particularly online, by
           extending Christian charity to all members of Christ’s church
           in their public and private discourse and exercising caution
           and restraint when interacting with the views of another; and
        D. Be it further resolved: that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America exhorts pastors and elders to
           instruct their congregations on the historic teaching of the Bible
           and the Christian church on human sexuality, especially as
           stated in Gen. 2:24,25, Rom. 1:24-32, 1 Cor. 6:9-11, 1 Cor. 7:1-
           28, Westminster Larger Catechism 139, and BCO 59-3; and
        E. Be it finally resolved: that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America encourages presbyteries,
           sessions, and congregations to seek the Lord in prayer for
           wisdom to navigate changing cultural contexts faithfully as a
           church committed to the scriptures, and to earnestly ask “the
           Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest fields,”
           (Luke 10:2).

Adopted by Nashville Presbytery at a called meeting on May 3, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE R. Neil Spence, stated clerk


OVERTURE 34 from Metro Atlanta Presbytery                           (to OC)
     “Use Human Sexuality Report for Study, Examination,
     and Conciliation”

[Note: This overture is similar to but not identical to Overture 33.]

Whereas: In this time of sexual confusion the Presbyterian Church in
      America needs to make a clear statement about qualifications for
      ordained office; and
Whereas: The Westminster Standards clearly state in Larger Catechism
      Question 139 that both same-sex sexual activity and same-sex lust
      are violations of God’s law; and
Whereas: The 47th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
      America approved the constitutionality of BCO 59-3, which
      states, “Marriage is only to be between one man and one woman
      (Gen. 2:24,25; Matt. 19:4-6, 1 Cor. 7:2), in accordance with the
      Word of God. Therefore, ministers in the Presbyterian Church in
      America who solemnize marriages shall only solemnize marriages
      between one man and one woman;” and
                                    1360
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas: BCO 21-4.c states that trials for the ordination of ministers,
      “shall consist of: (1) A careful examination as to: (a) his
      acquaintance with experiential religion, especially his personal
      character and family management (based on the qualifications set
      out in 1 Timothy 3:1-7, and Titus 1:6-9),” and BCO 24-1 states
      that each elder or deacon nominee “shall then be examined in: a.
      his Christian experience, especially his personal character and
      family management (based on the qualifications set out in 1
      Timothy 3:1-7 and Titus 1:6-9);” and
Whereas: The 48th General Assembly of the PCA declared the Report of
      the Ad interim Committee on Human Sexuality (AIC) as “a
      biblically faithful declaration.” Further, the grounds Calvary
      Presbytery unanimously adopted in sending up the overture stated,
      “The PCA ‘Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Human
      Sexuality,’ is a biblically faithful work by gifted churchmen
      within the PCA. It is a most useful resource concerning the
      apologetic and pastoral task surrounding gender and sexuality
      confusion within the PCA and the broader culture.” Further, the
      grounds adopted by the Committee of Commissioners on the
      Committee on Discipleship Ministries stated, “The report of the
      ad interim on Human Sexuality is an excellent resource for
      members and churches who seek to understand the biblical,
      confessional, and pastoral issues involved with addressing the
      topics of homosexuality, same-sex attraction, and transgenderism;”
      and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates the confessional doctrine of sin and
      temptation in relation to Same-Sex Attraction (SSA) in Statements
      3-6 (p. 7-10) and in its section on “Confessional Foundations” (pp.
      14-24), stating, “‘actual’ sin refers not to the reality or non-reality
      of sin, but to its being an act of the soul as opposed to a disposition
      or inclination only. While it is significant that a distinction is made
      between original and actual sin, the emphasis at this point in the
      Confession is that original sin, as a disposition or inclination, is
      truly sin,” (p. 14, line 39-p. 15, line 3), and “when the temptation
      arises from within, it is our own act and is rightly called sin,” (p.
      9, lines 18-19); and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates the confessional doctrine of
      sanctification in relation to SSA in Statement 7 (p. 10) and in its
      sections on “Real Change” (p. 22), “Celebrating Sincere Efforts”
      (p. 23), and “Discipleship for Believers Experiencing Same-Sex
      Attraction” (p. 24-25), stating, “to teach that our sinful corruption
                                    1361
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



      must be entirely removed from any part of us in order to be
      considered truly repentant is a spiritually treacherous perversion
      of the doctrine of repentance,” (p. 24, lines 24-26), and “Someone
      with homosexual attraction ought not close himself or herself off
      to the pursuit of, and hope of, real change in those attractions, even
      if that change is incomplete and mixed,” (p. 24, lines 38-40); and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates the confessional doctrine of
      repentance in relation to SSA in Statement 12 (p. 12-13) and in its
      section on “Confessional Foundations” (pp. 14-24), stating,
      “Where we have mistreated those who struggle with same-sex
      attraction, or with any other sinful desires, we call ourselves to
      repentance. Where we have nurtured or made peace with sinful
      thoughts, desires, words, or deeds, we call ourselves to
      repentance,” (p. 14 lines 37-40), and, “We give thanks for penitent
      believers who, though they continue to struggle with same-sex
      attraction, are living lives of chastity and obedience. These
      brothers and sisters can serve as courageous examples of faith and
      faithfulness, as they pursue Christ with a long obedience in gospel
      dependence,” (p. 15, lines 2-5); and
Whereas: The AIC clearly articulates the confessional approach to sexual
      identity and orientation in relation to SSA in Statements 9-10 (p.
      11-12) and in its section on “The Christian’s Identity” (pp. 26-31),
      stating, “Insofar as the term orientation is used descriptively to
      articulate a particular set of experiences, namely the persistent and
      predominant sexual attractions of an individual, it can remain
      useful as a way of classifying those experiences in contrast to the
      experiences of the majority of other people. However, insofar as
      the term orientation carries with it a set of assumptions about the
      nature of that experience that is unbiblical (e.g., overemphasized
      rigidity, its normativity, etc.), then the terminology may require
      qualification or even rejection in some circumstances,” (p. 30, line
      42-p. 31, line 4); and
Whereas: The AIC addresses the issue of terminology on pages 29-30,
      stating, “We should choose our language carefully with the goal
      that it expresses the truth and communicates clearly and
      winsomely in our particular context… language itself is a
      secondary issue relative to the doctrine it expresses. Sometimes
      there are disagreements about language even when the underlying
      doctrinal commitments seem to be the same. Thus, while doctrinal
      truth is rightly understood as obligating our affirmation, issues
      around terminology are more properly understood as issues of
                                   1362
                               APPENDIX W



      wisdom, necessitating careful Scriptural and pastoral guidance,”
      (p. 29, lines 11-17). While the AIC does not forbid use of the term
      “gay,” it still issues caution stating, “the word gay is not a neutral
      word in our cultural discourse, and Christians should be mindful
      of these dynamics when considering use of the term,” (p. 30, lines
      7-8). Of the term “Gay Christian,” the AIC states, “we believe it
      is generally unwise to use the language of gay Christian,” (p. 30,
      lines 28-19). On both terms “gay” and “gay christian” the report
      concludes, “we would do well to seek understanding before
      imparting advice. In practical and plain terms, the issue of
      terminology is more likely a matter for shepherding in wisdom,
      and not in and of itself grounds for discipline;” and
Whereas: The AIC sets clear boundaries for ordained office in the PCA,
      stating, “Insofar as such persons display the requisite Christian
      maturity, we do not consider this sin struggle automatically to
      disqualify someone for leadership in the church (1 Cor. 6:9-11, 1
      Tim. 3:1-7, Titus 1:6-9; 2 Pet. 1:3-11), (p. 31, lines 30-31);” and
Whereas: The AIC articulated its interpretation of 1 Cor. 6:9 as follows:
      “Paul coined the term arsenokoitai (1 Cor. 6:9; 1 Tim. 1:10) from
      the use of two related terms in the Septuagint version of Leviticus
      18 and 20. The basic meaning is “man-bedders” or men who have
      sex with other men…. The combination of arsenokoitai and
      malakoi, uniquely used in the New Testament in 1 Corinthians 6:9,
      likely refers most directly—as per the ESV footnote—to the active
      and passive partners in consensual homosexual activity. For more
      extended discussion, see Chapter 5 in Kevin DeYoung, What
      Does the Bible Really Say About Homosexuality? (Wheaton, IL:
      Crossway, 2015),” (p. 6, note 4); and
Whereas: In a recent decision on a complaint about a minister in Missouri
      Presbytery, the SJC stated, “If the Complainant had demonstrated,
      for example, that the minister was involved in homosexual behavior,
      cultivated unrepentant lustings, taught that either of those were
      not sinful, or was not continually seeking to mortify those
      temptations, it would have been proper to sustain the Complaint,”
      (SJC 2020-12, p. 23, lines 27-30) affirming the AIC report and laying
      out clear boundaries for ordained leadership in the PCA; and
Whereas: The Westminster Standards clearly state in Larger Catechism
      Question 144 that “The duties required in the Ninth
      Commandment are, the preserving and promoting of truth
      between man and man, and the good name of our neighbor, as well
      as our own; appearing and standing for the truth;…a charitable
                                   1363
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       esteem of our neighbors; loving, desiring, and rejoicing in their
       good name; sorrowing for, and covering of their infirmities; freely
       acknowledging of their gifts and graces, defending their
       innocency; a ready receiving of a good report, and unwillingness
       to admit of an evil report, concerning them; discouraging
       talebearers, flatterers, and slanderers;” and Larger Catechism
       Question 145 states that “The sins forbidden in the Ninth
       Commandment are, all prejudicing the truth, and the good name
       of our neighbors, as well as our own, especially in public
       judicature…speaking the truth unseasonably, or maliciously to a
       wrong end, or perverting it to a wrong meaning, or in doubtful and
       equivocal expressions, to the prejudice of truth or justice;
       speaking untruth, lying, slandering, backbiting, detracting, tale
       bearing, whispering, scoffing, reviling, rash, harsh, and partial
       censuring; misconstructing intentions, words, and actions;...raising
       false rumors, receiving and countenancing evil reports, and
       stopping our ears against just defense; evil suspicion;” and
Whereas: CDM has already published the AIC report in book form for
       easy distribution (https://www.pcabookstore.com/p-6275893-a-
       body-for-the-lordpca-papers-on-human-sexuality.aspx), and the
       PCA History website has all PCA studies available for easy
       download
       (https://www.pcahistory.org/pca/digest/studies/2021_human_sex
       uality_report.pdf).
Therefore be it resolved
       A. that the 49th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in
           America advises all presbyteries and sessions to:
           1. Fulfill the duty to “give due and serious consideration”
                (BCO 14-7) by making careful study of the 2021 Ad
                interim Report on Human Sexuality,
           2. Consider requiring all candidates for ordained office to do
                the same, and
           3. Utilize said report in examining the personal character of
                candidates for ordained office (BCO 21-4, 24-1); and
       B. Be it further resolved that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America advises the courts of the
           church not to use certain terms as litmus tests for biblical
           faithfulness or grounds for discipline but to seek
           understanding before imparting advice, in keeping with the
           2021 Ad interim Report on Human Sexuality's statements on
           terminology (p. 29-30); and
                                   1364
                              APPENDIX W



        C. Be it further resolved that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America exhorts pastors and elders to
           instruct their congregations on the historic teaching of the
           Bible and the Christian church on human sexuality, especially
           as stated in Gen. 2:24,25, Rom. 1:24-32, 1 Cor. 6:9-11, 1 Cor.
           7:1-28, Westminster Larger Catechism 139, and BCO 59-3;
           and
        D. Be it finally resolved that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America encourages presbyteries and
           congregations to seek the Lord in prayer for wisdom to navigate
           changing cultural contexts faithfully as a church committed to
           the scriptures, and to earnestly ask “the Lord of the harvest to
           send out laborers into his harvest fields,” (Luke 10:2).

Adopted by Metro Atlanta Presbytery at its stated meeting, May 3, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE Randy Schlichting, stated clerk


OVERTURE 35 from North Florida Presbytery                          (to OC)
     “Use Human Sexuality Report for Study, Assessment,
     and Conciliation”

[Note: This overture is similar to Overtures 33 and 34, but differs in a
number of details.]

Whereas, the peace and purity of the Presbyterian Church in America has
      been disturbed by the sexual confusion prevalent in our culture;
      and
Whereas, the lower courts of the Presbyterian Church in America would
      benefit from clear guidance about qualifications for ordained
      office with reference to complex and culturally contested matters
      concerning human sexuality; and
Whereas, the Westminster Standards clearly teach that original sin, as a
      disposition or inclination, is truly and properly sin (Westminster
      Confession of Faith 6.5) and that same-sex sexual lust and same-
      sex sexual activity are violations of God’s righteous law
      (Westminster Larger Catechism 138 and 139); and
Whereas, BCO 21-4.a states that trials for the ordination of ministers
      require careful examination of a candidate’s “acquaintance with
      experiential religion, especially his personal character and family
      management (based on the qualifications set out in

                                   1365
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



      1 Timothy 3:1-7, and Titus 1:6-9),” and BCO 24-1 requires the
      same standards for the examination of ruling elder and deacon
      nominees; and
Whereas, Calvary Presbytery unanimously adopted an overture
      commending the report of the Ad Interim Committee on Human
      Sexuality (AIC) to the 48th General Assembly on the following
      grounds: “The PCA ‘Report of the Ad Interim Committee on
      Human Sexuality,’ is a biblically faithful work by gifted
      churchmen within the PCA. It is a most useful resource
      concerning the apologetic and pastoral task surrounding gender
      and sexuality confusion within the PCA and the broader culture;”
      and
Whereas, the 48th General Assembly of the PCA declared the AIC report
      to be “a biblically faithful declaration;” and
Whereas, the AIC report articulates the confessional doctrine of
      sanctification in relation to same-sex attraction, stating, “to teach
      that our sinful corruption must be entirely removed from any part
      of us in order to be considered truly repentant is a spiritually
      treacherous perversion of the doctrine of repentance” (p. 24).
      Additionally, the report teaches that “someone with homosexual
      attraction ought not to close himself or herself off to the pursuit
      of, and hope of, real change in those attractions, even if that
      change is incomplete and mixed” (p. 24); and
Whereas, the AIC report articulates the confessional approach to
      terminology in relation to same-sex identity, stating, “Christians
      ought to understand themselves, define themselves, and describe
      themselves in light of their union with Christ and their identity as
      regenerate, justified, holy children of God (Rom. 6:5-11; 1 Cor.
      6:15-20; Eph. 2:1-10). To juxtapose identities rooted in sinful
      desires alongside the term “Christian” is inconsistent with Biblical
      language and undermines the spiritual reality that we are new
      creations in Christ (2 Cor. 5:17)” (pp. 11-12); and
Whereas, the AIC report articulates that “it is generally unwise to use the
      language of gay Christian” due to the dynamic and diverse uses of
      the term “gay” in our cultural discourse (p. 30); and
Whereas, the AIC report also recognizes “a difference between speaking
      about a phenomenological facet of a person’s sin-stained reality
      and employing the language of sinful desires as a personal identity
      marker” (p. 11) and that some faithful believers employ the
      terminology of “gay” merely to describe their sexual attractions


                                   1366
                               APPENDIX W



      without any “intention to make a definitive statement about
      identity” (p. 30); and
Whereas, the AIC report concludes that on the use of the terms “gay” and
      “gay Christian” that “we would do well to seek understanding
      before imparting advice. In practical and plain terms, the issue of
      terminology is more likely a matter for shepherding in wisdom,
      and not in itself grounds for discipline” (p. 30); and
Whereas, the AIC report articulates the confessional approach to sexual
      orientation in relation to same-sex attraction, stating, “Insofar as
      the term orientation is used descriptively to articulate a particular
      set of experiences, namely the persistent and predominant sexual
      attractions of an individual, it can remain useful as a way of
      classifying those experiences in contrast to the experiences of the
      majority of other people. However, insofar as the term orientation
      carries with it a set of assumptions about the nature of that
      experience that is unbiblical (e.g., overemphasized rigidity, its
      normativity, etc.), then the terminology may require qualification
      or even rejection in some circumstances” (pp. 30-31); and
Whereas, the AIC sets clear boundaries for ordained office in the PCA,
      stating, “Insofar as such persons display the requisite Christian
      maturity, we do not consider this sin struggle automatically to
      disqualify someone for leadership in the church (1 Cor. 6:9-11; 1
      Tim. 3:1-7; Titus 1:6-9; 2 Pet. 1:3-11)” (p. 31); and
Whereas, Westminster Larger Catechism 144 explicitly states: “The
      duties required in the ninth commandment are, the preserving and
      promoting of truth between man and man, and the good name of
      our neighbor, as well as our own; appearing and standing for the
      truth; and from the heart, sincerely, freely, clearly, and fully,
      speaking the truth, and only the truth, in matters of judgment and
      justice, and in all other things whatsoever; a charitable esteem of
      our neighbors; loving, desiring, and rejoicing in their good name;
      sorrowing for, and covering of their infirmities; freely
      acknowledging of their gifts and graces, defending their
      innocency; a ready receiving of a good report, and unwillingness
      to admit of an evil report, concerning them; discouraging tale-
      bearers, flatterers, and slanderers;” and Westminster Larger
      Catechism 145 states: “The sins forbidden in the ninth
      commandment are, all prejudicing the truth, and the good name of
      our neighbors, as well as our own, especially in public judicature;
      giving false evidence, suborning false witnesses, wittingly
      appearing and pleading for an evil cause, out-facing and over-
                                   1367
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       bearing the truth; passing unjust sentence, calling evil good, and
       good evil … speaking the truth unseasonably, or maliciously to a
       wrong end, or perverting it to a wrong meaning, or in doubtful or
       equivocal expressions, to the prejudice of truth or justice;
       speaking untruth, lying slandering, backbiting, detracting,
       talebearing, whispering, scoffing, reviling, rash, harsh, and partial
       censuring; mis-constructing intentions, words and actions …
       raising false rumors, receiving and countenancing evil reports, and
       stopping our ears against just defense; evil suspicion.”
Therefore, be it resolved
       A. That the 49th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
            in America advises all lower courts to:
            1, Fulfill the duty to “give due and serious consideration”
                 (BCO 14-7) to the approval of the 2021 Ad Interim Report
                 on Human Sexuality by the 48th General Assembly by
                 making a careful study of its contents,
            2. Consider requiring all candidates for ordained office to do
                 the same, and
            3. Utilize the AIC report as a guide to examine the personal
                 character of candidates for ordained office (BCO 21-4;
                 24-1) and to assess doctrinal or ethical charges brought
                 against any ordained officer on relevant subject matters;
                 and
       B. Be it further resolved, that the 49th General Assembly of the
            Presbyterian Church in America advises the courts of the
            church to exercise wisdom in weighing matters with regard to
            the complex issues addressed in the AIC report, especially
            avoiding hasty judgments based on terminology surrounding
            same-sex identity and orientation; and
       C. Be it further resolved, that the 49th General Assembly of the
            Presbyterian Church in America, in obedience to the ninth
            commandment, urges pastors and elders to exercise caution,
            fair judgment, charity, and restraint when interacting with the
            views of another, especially online, in order to ensure that we
            honor our fellow elders and the courts that protect the sanctity
            of our denomination; and
       D. Be it further resolved, that the 49th General Assembly of the
            Presbyterian Church in America exhorts pastors and elders to
            instruct their congregations on the historic teaching of the
            Bible and the Christian church regarding human sexuality,
            especially as stated in Genesis 2:24-25; Romans 1:24-32; 1
                                   1368
                              APPENDIX W



           Corinthians 6:9-11; 1 Corinthians 7:1-28, Westminster Larger
           Catechism 138 and 139, and BCO 59-3; and
        E. Be it finally resolved, that the 49th General Assembly of the
           Presbyterian Church in America encourages presbyteries and
           congregations to seek the Lord in prayer for wisdom to
           navigate changing cultural contexts faithfully as a church
           committed to the Scriptures and to the Great Commission.

Adopted by North Florida Presbytery at its stated meeting on May 12, 2022
Attested by TE David Burke, stated clerk


OVERTURE 36 from Southeast Alabama Presbytery                    (to SJC)
     "BCO 34-1 Request to Assume Original Jurisdiction
     over TE Greg Johnson"

Whereas in his responses to Missouri Presbytery’s July 21, 2020, BCO
      31-2 investigation of allegations against him, TE Greg Johnson
      affirmed in some matters he was either unclear, imprecise, or his
      perspectives have matured over time (SJC Judicial Case 2020-12,
      pg. 10, lines 40-45), and
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
      additional questions, TE Greg Johnson affirmed his belief in the
      Bible’s teaching on human sexuality with regard to same-sex
      attraction (homosexual orientation, inter alia) and qualifications
      for ordained ministerial office, as summarized in the Westminster
      Standards (e.g., SJC Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 14; lines 25-30;
      lines 42-45, pg. 15; lines 1-20, etc.), and
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
      additional questions, TE Greg Johnson specifically denied
      identifying as a “gay Christian,” including using this couplet of
      words (SJC Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 17; lines 42-46, pg. 16;
      lines 1-11), and
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
      additional questions, TE Greg Johnson affirmed the necessity of a
      man ordained to ministerial office to be above reproach (SJC
      Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 24; lines 38-46, pg. 25; lines 1-46,
      pg. 26; lines 1-30), and
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
      additional questions, TE Greg Johnson affirmed that some of his
      public comments had upset the peace of the PCA, and offered a
                                   1369
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



       commitment to repair such harm and work to commit no further
       harm (SJC Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 27; lines 25-34), and
Whereas since the record of the case of the original Missouri Presbytery
       investigation of him (July 21, 2020), and even subsequent to the
       Standing Judicial Commission judicial case 2020-12 (October 21,
       2021), TE Greg Johnson has made numerous public comments
       that appear to either contradict or at least offer confusion to his
       previous affirmations in these matters (see examples in the
       attached addendum), and
Whereas the Standing Judicial Commission found Missouri Presbytery
       did err by failing to “do what it needed to do to protect the peace
       and purity of the broader Church, particularly in light of the
       responsibilities set forth in BCO 11-3, 4” pertaining to Revoice 18
       (SJC Judicial Case 2020-05 (March 3, 2022); pg. 11; lines 26-35),
       and
Whereas TE Greg Johnson uses the same confusing and misleading
       terminology as Revoice 18 throughout his book, Still Time to Care:
       What We Can Learn from the Church’s Failed Attempt to Cure
       Homosexuality (Zondervan, 12/7/21) [“homosexual Christian” p.
       25, “gay believer” pp. 8, 14, “homosexual believers” pp. 9, 116,
       “sexual minorities” pp. 33, 221, 230],
Therefore be it resolved that Southeast Alabama Presbytery requests that
       the General Assembly assume original jurisdiction in the case of
       the doctrinal error of Teaching Elder Greg Johnson per BCO 34-1.

Commission of Southeast Alabama approved to draft and submit this
        request by Presbytery at its stated meeting, October 22, 2019.
Commission of Southeast Alabama Presbytery voted to submit this
request, April 14, 2022.
Attested by /s/ TE Kevin Corley, stated clerk.

Attachment: Addendum, examples of public comments from TE Greg
       Johnson either contradicting or offering confusion to his
       affirmations to Missouri Presbytery’s BCO 31-2 investigation
       (July 21, 2020), and the Standing Judicial Commission judicial
       case 2020-12 (October 21, 2021)




                                  1370
                             APPENDIX W



                            Attachment
              (Overture 36 to 49th General Assembly)

Examples of public comments from TE Greg Johnson either
contradicting or offering confusion to his affirmations to Missouri
Presbytery’s BCO 31-2 investigation (July 21, 2020), and the Standing
Judicial Commission judicial case 2020-12 (October 21, 2021)

11/05/21   Comments in an article, published in the Washington Post,
           “Traditional ‘Side B’ LGBTQ Christians experience a
           renaissance,” by Kathryn Post (originally published by
           Religion News Service,
           https://religionnews.com/2021/11/05/traditional-side-b-
           lgbtq-christians-experience-a-renaissance/).
11/18/21   Comments in a blog post, published on The Center For
           Faith, Sexuality & Gender blog site, “Equivocation and the
           Ex-Gay Script” (https://www.centerforfaith.com/
           blog/equivocation-and-the-ex-gay-script)
12/03/21   Comments in a podcast interview, published on The Hole in
           My Heart Podcast, “Episode 189: The Church Wasn’t
           Always So Bad at the LGBTQ Conversation with Greg
           Johnson” (https://lauriekrieg.com/podcast/the-church-wasnt-
           always-so-terrible-at-the-lgbtq-conversation-with-greg-
           johnson/)
12/07/21   Comments in his book, Still Time to Care: What We Can
           Learn from the Church’s Failed Attempt to Cure
           Homosexuality (Zondervan, 12/7/21).
12/22/21   Comments in an article, published in USA Today, “ I'm a
           gay, celibate pastor of a conservative church. Here's a trick
           for de-escalation.” (https://www.usatoday.com/
           story/opinion/voices/2021/12/22/family-holidays-god-
           patience-compassion/ 6496994001/?gnt-cfr=1.)
12/29/21   Comment on Facebook page, “As you consider final year
           end giving, please support Revoice. No movement has done
           more to shift conservative Christian thinking from the false
           hope of ex-gay cures to the great tradition of care for non-
           straight people committed to living out the biblical sexual
           ethic within the church. This ministry has meant a great deal
           to me, and your consideration will be deeply appreciated.”
01/02/22   Comments in a podcast interview, published on The Hopper
           Podcast, “41 Greg Johnson, Still Time to Care / Linus in the
           Resurrection” (https://podcasts.captivate.
                                 1371
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



            fm/media/4b17fc7d-79da-4c3a-8ab0-74ebf4a0cb92/02-greg-
            johnson.mp3).
01/04/22    Comments in a podcast interview, published on
            Conversations About Life, “Being Gay and Christian w/
            Pastor Greg Johnson” (https://willjackson.com/ being-gay-
            and-christian-w-pastor-greg-johnson/).
01/25/22    Comments in a podcast interview, published on The
            Learner's Corner with Caleb Mason, “Episode 269: Greg
            Johnson On What We Can Learn From the Church's Failed
            Attempt to Cure Homosexuality” (https://podcast.app/greg-
            johnson-on-what-we-can-learn-from-the-churchs-failed-
            attempt-to-cure-homosexuality-e202358953/).
02/12/22    Comments in a booklet, On Mission with the LGBTQ+
            Community (Zondervan, supplement to Still Time to Care).
            (https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?
            story_fbid=3140676279584649&id=100009269249854&__c
            ft__[0]=AZXHombYoEDWNCvkRpzWlYG8mCooDtS2qQ
            k_KzE6Lcn8KadXolEqezT3elg4dvGvKFRISxCyDHC6Lcf
            CIunLwthjBCwcxaJKRSz2aABvF0_GC-
            5IvMsxxmlCyTGwR41H7x0& __tn__=%2CO%2CP-R,
            https://drive.google.com/file/d/1gu0ZH6igfWes0vyp
            OUnEtnTEMigw9fVu/view).


OVERTURE 37 from Grace Presbytery                          (to SJC)
     "BCO 34-1 Request to Assume Original Jurisdiction over
     TE Greg Johnson"

[Note: This overture is almost identical to Overture 36.]

Whereas in his responses to Missouri Presbytery’s July 21, 2020, BCO
      31-2 investigation of allegations against him, TE Greg Johnson
      affirmed in some matters he was either unclear, imprecise, or his
      perspectives have matured over time (SJC Judicial Case 2020-12,
      pg. 10, lines 40-45), and
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
      additional questions, TE Greg Johnson affirmed his belief in the
      Bible’s teaching on human sexuality regarding same-sex
      attraction (homosexual orientation, inter alia) and qualifications
      for ordained ministerial office, as summarized in the Westminster


                                   1372
                               APPENDIX W



       Standards (e.g., SJC Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 14; lines 25-30;
       lines 42-45, pg. 15; lines 1-20, etc.), and
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
       additional questions, TE Greg Johnson specifically denied
       identifying as a “gay Christian,” including using this couplet of
       words (SJC Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 17; lines 42-46, pg. 16; lines
       1-11), and
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
       additional questions, TE Greg Johnson affirmed the necessity of a
       man ordained to ministerial office to be above reproach (SJC
       Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 24; lines 38-46, pg. 25; lines 1-46, pg.
       26; lines 1-30),
Whereas in his responses to the Standing Judicial Commission’s
       additional questions, TE Greg Johnson affirmed that some of his
       public comments had upset the peace of the PCA, and offered a
       commitment to repair such harm and work to commit no further
       harm (SJC Judicial Case 2020-12, pg. 27; lines 25-34), and
Whereas since the record of the case of the original Missouri Presbytery
       investigation of him (July 21, 2020), and even after the Standing
       Judicial Commission judicial case 2020-12 (October 21, 2021),
       TE Greg Johnson has made numerous public comments that
       appear to either contradict or at least offer confusion to his
       previous affirmations in these matters (see examples in the
       attached addendum), and
Whereas the Standing Judicial Commission found Missouri Presbytery
       did err by “failing to do what it needed to do to protect the peace
       and purity of the broader Church, particularly in light of the
       responsibilities set forth in BCO 11-3, 4” pertaining to Revoice 18
       (SJC Judicial Case 2020-05; lines 26-35), and
Whereas TE Greg Johnson uses the same confusing and misleading
       terminology as Revoice 18, throughout his book, Still Time to
       Care: What We Can Learn from the Church’s Failed Attempt to
       Cure Homosexuality (Zondervan, 12/7/21),
Therefore, be it resolved that Grace Presbytery requests that the General
       Assembly assume original jurisdiction in the case of the doctrinal
       error of Teaching Elder Greg Johnson, per BCO 34-1.

Approved by Grace Presbytery at its stated meeting, May 10, 2022
Attested by /s/ RE Samuel J. Duncan, stated clerk



                                   1373
                MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Attachment: Addendum, examples of public comments from TE Greg
       Johnson either contradicting or offering confusion to his
       affirmations to Missouri Presbytery’s BCO 31-2 investigation
       (July 21, 2020), and the Standing Judicial Commission judicial
       case 2020-12 (October 21, 2021)


                            Attachment
              (Overture 37 to 49th General Assembly)

    Examples of public comments from TE Greg Johnson either
 contradicting or offering confusion to his affirmations to Missouri
    Presbytery’s BCO 31-2 investigation (July 21, 2020), and the
  Standing Judicial Commission judicial case 2020-12 (October 21,
                               2021)

11/05/21   Comments in an article, published in the Washington Post,
           “Traditional ‘Side B’ LGBTQ Christians experience a
           renaissance,” by Kathryn Post (originally published by
           Religion News Service,
           https://religionnews.com/2021/11/05/traditional-side-b-
           lgbtq-christians-experience-a-renaissance/).
11/18/21   Comments in a blog post, published on The Center For
           Faith, Sexuality & Gender blog site, “Equivocation and the
           Ex-Gay Script” (https://www.centerforfaith.com/
           blog/equivocation-and-the-ex-gay-script)
12/03/21   Comments in a podcast interview, published on The Hole in
           My Heart Podcast, “Episode 189: The Church Wasn’t
           Always So Bad at the LGBTQ Conversation with Greg
           Johnson” (https://lauriekrieg.com/podcast/the-church-wasnt-
           always-so-terrible-at-the-lgbtq-conversation-with-greg-
           johnson/)
12/07/21   Comments in his book, Still Time to Care: What We Can
           Learn from the Church’s Failed Attempt to Cure
           Homosexuality (Zondervan, 12/7/21).
12/22/21   Comments in an article, published in USA Today, “ I'm a
           gay, celibate pastor of a conservative church. Here's a trick
           for de-escalation.” (https://www.usatoday.com/
           story/opinion/voices/2021/12/22/family-holidays-god-
           patience-compassion/ 6496994001/?gnt-cfr=1.)


                                 1374
                             APPENDIX W



12/29/21   Comment on Facebook page, “As you consider final year
           end giving, please support Revoice. No movement has done
           more to shift conservative Christian thinking from the false
           hope of ex-gay cures to the great tradition of care for non-
           straight people committed to living out the biblical sexual
           ethic within the church. This ministry has meant a great deal
           to me, and your consideration will be deeply appreciated.”
01/02/22   Comments in a podcast interview, published on The Hopper
           Podcast, “41 Greg Johnson, Still Time to Care / Linus in the
           Resurrection” (https://podcasts.captivate.
           fm/media/4b17fc7d-79da-4c3a-8ab0-74ebf4a0cb92/02-greg-
           johnson.mp3).
01/04/22   Comments in a podcast interview, published on
           Conversations About Life, “Being Gay and Christian w/
           Pastor Greg Johnson” (https://willjackson.com/ being-gay-
           and-christian-w-pastor-greg-johnson/).
01/25/22   Comments in a podcast interview, published on The
           Learner's Corner with Caleb Mason, “Episode 269: Greg
           Johnson On What We Can Learn From the Church's Failed
           Attempt to Cure Homosexuality” (https://podcast.app/greg-
           johnson-on-what-we-can-learn-from-the-churchs-failed-
           attempt-to-cure-homosexuality-e202358953/).
02/12/22   Comments in a booklet, On Mission with the LGBTQ+
           Community (Zondervan, supplement to Still Time to Care).
           (https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?
           story_fbid=3140676279584649&id=100009269249854&__c
           ft__[0]=AZXHombYoEDWNCvkRpzWlYG8mCooDtS2qQ
           k_KzE6Lcn8KadXolEqezT3elg4dvGvKFRISxCyDHC6Lcf
           CIunLwthjBCwcxaJKRSz2aABvF0_GC-
           5IvMsxxmlCyTGwR41H7x0& __tn__=%2CO%2CP-R,
           https://drive.google.com/file/d/1gu0ZH6igfWes0vyp
           OUnEtnTEMigw9fVu/view).




                                 1375
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 38 from Chesapeake Presbytery                           (to SJC)
     “Request for SJC to Assume Original Jurisdiction in
     CIP matters re Dan Herron”

Whereas, the Word of God in I Corinthians 6:1-8 is clear in its injunction
      against Christians suing one another in civil court where there
      exists an ecclesial court with jurisdiction, and
Whereas, TE Daniel Herron has been credibly accused of impropriety by
      several members and/or regular attenders of Hope Presbyterian
      Church (Bloomington, IN), where he served as pastor, and
Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery instituted process against TE
      Herron on the basis of those accusations and the Presbytery’s
      finding of a “strong presumption of guilt,” and
Whereas, after the Central Indiana Presbytery found a “strong
      presumption of guilt” and had instituted process, TE Herron filed
      suit in the Monroe County (Indiana) Circuit Court against certain
      of his accusers, claiming that their accusations caused him harm,
      and
Whereas, TE Herron specifically referenced the likelihood that his
      accusers’ statements have been and will be “used in Ecclesial
      Committee Hearings of the Central Indiana Presbytery and/or the
      Presbyterian Church in America,” as part of the substance of the
      damages caused, and
Whereas, this constitutes clear evidence of TE Herron’s intention to
      employ the civil magistrate to prevent his accusers’ testimony
      against him, and thus preclude or undermine the proceedings of
      the ecclesial court, and
Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery ruled TE Herron contumacious
      for his refusal to withdraw the civil suit, suspending him from
      office and the sacraments, and
Whereas, this action of the Central Indiana Presbytery demonstrates that
      it recognized the seriousness of TE Herron’s sin in filing suit
      against his accusers in the first place, and
Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery later removed the ruling of
      contumacy despite TE Herron’s lack of repentance, after he
      removed certain documents from the suit’s evidence chain but
      continued to refuse to withdraw the suit, and
Whereas, this later action of the Central Indiana Presbytery, removing the
      finding of contumacy without TE Herron repenting of the sin of
      filing suit, not only demonstrates a refusal to act against a sin
      previously recognized, but could also be construed as a choice to
      participate in it with TE Herron, and

                                  1376
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery, by removing the finding of
       contumacy absent repentance, has chosen to allow the suit to
       continue in flagrant violation of I Corinthians 6, refusing to act to
       discipline TE Herron’s sin, bringing disrepute on the name of
       Christ and undermining both their own authority and the authority
       of all courts of the PCA generally with respect to the civil
       magistrate, and
Whereas, public letters written by concerned members of the Central
       Indiana Presbytery indicate deep division and weariness within
       the presbytery, considerable concern for the harm that this
       division has caused the accusers, as well as a resultant lack of
       belief in the ability of the CIP to conduct an impartial trial, and
Whereas, BCO 34-1 provides mechanism for the General Assembly to
       assume original jurisdiction when “the Presbytery refuses to act in
       doctrinal cases or cases of public scandal,” and
Whereas, allegations concerning the alleged sinful conduct of TE Daniel
       Herron and Central Indiana Presbytery’s handling of the case have
       been widely reported in public media, resulting in public scandal
       involving not only the accused, but also the CIP and the
       Presbyterian Church in America,
Therefore, be it resolved that the Chesapeake Presbytery petitions the
       49th General Assembly to assume original jurisdiction of the case
       against TE Daniel Herron immediately, so as to investigate the
       accusations thoroughly and to try the matter impartially, for the
       express purpose of defending the honor of Christ, clearing the
       public scandal, restoring the peace and purity of Christ’s Church,
       and providing the care of the true Shepherd to TE Daniel Herron
       and to his accusers.

Adopted by Chesapeake Presbytery at its 91st stated meeting, May 10, 2022
Attested by /s/ RE Timothy M. Persons, stated clerk




                                   1377
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 39 from Northern California Presbytery             (to SJC)
     “Request for SJC to Assume Original Jurisdiction in CIP matters
     re Dan Herron”

[Note: This overture is similar to but not identical to Overture 38 from
        Chesapeake Presbytery.]

Whereas, the Word of God in I Corinthians 6:1-8 is clear in its injunction
      against Christians suing one another in civil court where there
      exists an ecclesial court with jurisdiction, and
Whereas, TE Daniel Herron has been credibly accused of impropriety by
      several members and/or regular attenders of Hope Presbyterian
      Church (Bloomington, IN) where he served as pastor, and
Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery instituted process against TE
      Herron on the basis of those accusations and the Presbytery’s
      finding of a “strong presumption of guilt,” and
Whereas, after the Central Indiana Presbytery found a “strong
      presumption of guilt” and had instituted process, TE Herron filed
      suit in the Monroe County (Indiana) Circuit Court against certain
      of his accusers,25 claiming that their accusations caused him harm,
      and
Whereas, TE Herron specifically referenced the likelihood that his
      accusers’ statements have been and will be “used in Ecclesial
      Committee Hearings of the Central Indiana Presbytery and/or the
      Presbyterian Church in America,”26 as part of the substance of the
      damages caused and cause for the civil magistrate to rule in his
      favor, and
Whereas, this constitutes clear evidence of TE Herron’s intention to
      employ the civil magistrate to prevent his accusers’ testimony
      against him, and thus preclude or undermine the proceedings of
      the ecclesial court, and
Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery ruled TE Herron contumacious
      for his refusal to withdraw the civil suit, suspending him from
      office and the sacraments, and
Whereas, this action of the Central Indiana Presbytery demonstrates that
      it recognized the seriousness of TE Herron’s sin in filing suit
      against his accusers in the first place, and

25
   Case #53C01-2106-CT-001359, “Dan Herron v. Kara Million, Abigail
Gschwend-Harris” (accessed at http://mycase.in.gov)
26
   Case #53C01-2106-CT-001359, “Complaint for Damages and Jury Demand”
(filed 25 June 2021), §§37, 45; “Amended Complaint” (filed 6 December 2021),
§35.
                                    1378
                               APPENDIX W



Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery later removed the ruling of
       contumacy despite TE Herron’s lack of repentance, after he
       removed certain documents from the suit’s evidence chain27 but
       continued to refuse to withdraw the suit, and
Whereas, this later action of the Central Indiana Presbytery, removing the
       finding of contumacy without TE Herron repenting of the sin of
       filing suit, demonstrates not only a refusal to act against a sin
       previously recognized, but could also be construed as a choice to
       participate in that sin with TE Herron, and
Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery, by removing the finding of
       contumacy absent repentance, has chosen to allow the suit to
       continue in flagrant violation of I Corinthians 6, refusing to act to
       discipline TE Herron’s sin, bringing disrepute on the name of
       Christ and undermining both their own authority and the authority
       of all courts of the PCA generally with respect to the civil
       magistrate, and
Whereas, allegations concerning the alleged sinful conduct of TE Daniel
       Herron together with the Central Indiana Presbytery’s handling of
       the case have been widely reported in public media, resulting in
       public scandal involving not only the accused, but also the Central
       Indiana Presbytery and the Presbyterian Church in America, and
Whereas, BCO 34-1 provides mechanism for the General Assembly to
       assume original jurisdiction when “the Presbytery refuses to act in
       doctrinal cases or cases of public scandal”,
Therefore, be it resolved that the Northern California Presbytery petitions
       the 49th General Assembly to assume original jurisdiction of the
       case against TE Daniel Herron immediately, so as to investigate
       the accusations thoroughly and to try the matter impartially, for
       the express purpose of defending the honor of Christ, clearing the
       public scandal, restoring the peace and purity of Christ’s Church,
       and providing the care of a true shepherd to TE Daniel Herron and
       to his accusers.

Adopted by the Northern California Presbytery at its stated meeting, May 6,
2022
Attested by /s/ RE Marcel Weiland, Stated Clerk.




27
  Case #53C01-2106-CT-001359, “Amended Complaint” (filed 6 December
2021).
                                   1379
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 40 from the Northern New England Presbytery              (to SJC)
     “Request for SJC to Assume Original Jurisdiction in
     CIP matters re Dan Herron”

[Note: This overture deals with the same matters as Overtures 38 and 39.]

Whereas, the Word of God in I Corinthians 6:1-8 is clear in its injunction
       against Christians suing one another in civil court where there
       exists an ecclesial court with jurisdiction, and
Whereas, TE Daniel Herron has been credibly accused of impropriety by
       several members and/or regular attenders of Hope Presbyterian
       Church (Bloomington, IN), where he served as pastor, and
Whereas, the Central Indiana Presbytery instituted process against TE
       Herron on the basis of those accusations and the Presbytery’s
       finding of a “strong presumption of guilt,” and
Whereas, after the Central Indiana Presbytery found a “strong presumption
       of guilt” and had instituted process, TE Herron filed suit in the
       Monroe County (Indiana) Circuit Court against certain of his
       accusers,28 claiming that their accusations caused him harm, and
Whereas, allegations concerning the alleged sinful conduct of TE Daniel
       Herron together with the Central Indiana Presbytery’s handling of
       the case have been widely reported in public media, resulting in
       public scandal involving not only the accused, but also the Central
       Indiana Presbytery and the Presbyterian Church in America, and
Whereas, TE Herron is not under censure for his continued pursuit of civil
       litigation in the above matter, and
Whereas, BCO 34-1 provides mechanism for the General Assembly to
       assume original jurisdiction when “the Presbytery refuses to act in
       doctrinal cases or cases of public scandal”,
Therefore, be it resolved that Northern New England Presbytery petitions
       the 49th General Assembly to assume original jurisdiction of the
       case against TE Daniel Herron immediately, so as to investigate
       the accusations thoroughly and to try the matter impartially, for
       the express purpose of defending the honor of Christ, clearing the




28
  Case #53C01-2106-CT-001359, “Dan Herron v. Kara Million, Abigail Gschwend
-Harris” (accessed at http://mycase.in.gov)
                                   1380
                               APPENDIX W



        public scandal, restoring the peace and purity of Christ’s Church,
        and providing the care of a true shepherd to TE Daniel Herron and
        to his accusers.

Adopted by N. New England Presbytery at its stated meeting, May 21, 2022
Attested by /s/ TE C.S. Per Almquist, stated clerk


OVERTURE 41 from the Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago
                                                        (to OC)
     “Declare Critical Race Theory Flawed”

Whereas, in recent years, there has been increased engagement in the
      discipline known as Critical Race Theory, and
Whereas, Critical Race Theory, though difficult to define, can be roughly
      understood through the following tenets:

        [Tenet 1:] Racism is a normal part of American life,
        often lacking the ability to be distinctively recognized… A
        CRT lens unveils the various forms in which racism
        continually manifests itself, despite espoused institutional
        values regarding equity and social justice.

        [Tenet 2:] [Ideas like] liberalism, neutrality, objectivity,
        colorblindness, and meritocracy… camouflage [how]
        racial advantage propels the self-interests, power, and
        privileges of the dominant group.

        [Tenet 3:] CRT gives voice to the unique perspectives and
        lived experiences of people of color… CRT uses
        counternarratives as a way to highlight discrimination,
        offer racially different interpretations of policy, and
        challenge the universality of assumptions made about
        people of color.

        [Tenet 4:] CRT recognizes interest-convergence, the
        process whereby the white power structure ‘will tolerate or
        encourage racial advances for Blacks only when they also
        promote white self-interests’.



                                   1381
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



        [Tenet 5:] Revisionist History is another tenet of CRT
        [which] suggests that American history be closely
        scrutinized and reinterpreted as opposed to being accepted
        at face value and truth.

        [Tenet 6:] CRT also relies on Racial Realists, or
        individuals who not only recognize race as a social
        construct, but also realize that ‘racism is a means by
        which society allocates privilege and status.’

       [Tenet 7:] CRT critiques [claims that]: (a)
       [colorblindness] will eliminate racism; (b) racism is a
       matter of individuals, not systems; and (c) one can fight
       racism without paying attention to sexism, homophobia,
       economic exploitation, and other forms of oppression or
       injustice29
Whereas, this discipline has been far more prevalent at a popular level,
       being weaponized in many social, political, and even religious
       contexts, and
Whereas, many in the church are wondering how they are to think of and
       respond to Critical Race Theory, and
Whereas, it would be helpful to speak clearly and decisively on this, and
       other issues to help disciple our people, and
Whereas, Critical Race Theory is seriously flawed in many respects, and
       leads to distorted views of race, reconciliation, and sin, and
Whereas, what may be viewed as positive in Critical Theory is able to be
       found or derived outside of Critical Race Theory, without the need
       for engaging such a problematic discipline, and
Whereas, the Holy Scriptures, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ offers a
       better, more beautiful, and sufficient way for addressing the issues
       of racial tension and human flourishing,
Therefore, be it resolved that the 49th General Assembly declare Critical
       Race Theory to be a seriously flawed, and an overall unhelpful
       way for addressing the issues surrounding race within the church,
       and rather point believers to the greater, truly sufficient answer


29
  https://shenviapologetics.com/what-is-critical-race-theory/. Directly
quoting from “Access and Equity for African American Students in
Higher Education: A Critical Race Historical Analysis of Policy Efforts,”
The Journal of Higher Education, 80(4), 2009, p. 389-414.
                                   1382
                              APPENDIX W



        centered on the reconciliation which has been accomplished
        through the blood of Christ (Galatians 2:11-22).

Submitted by the Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago to Chicago
    Metro Presbytery for its stated meeting, on May 4th, 2022
Rejected by Chicago Metro Presbytery at its stated meeting, May 18th, 2022
    (RAO 11-10). (Attested by /s/ TE Michael Kyle Edwards, stated clerk,
    Chicago Metro Presbytery)
Submitted by the Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago to the 49th
    General Assembly of the PCA, May 19, 2022


OVERTURE 42 from Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago
                                                            (to OC)
     “Forbid TE and RE Participation in ‘Political Groups’”

Whereas, our denomination, the Presbyterian Church in America (PCA),
      has been facing increasing amount of tension within its courts due
      to several factors, and
Whereas, tensions are only increased when our trust in one another is
      damaged, and
Whereas, trust has been damaged in previous years due to the revelation
      of secretive and exclusive political factions working amidst the
      courts to further their particular agenda, and
Whereas, many are concerned that these efforts have included the
      manipulation of church courts, and
Whereas, all the Elders of the PCA have taken vows to strive “for the
      purity, peace, and unity of the church,” and
Whereas, the peace and unity of the church has been disturbed by the
      actions of secretive and exclusive political groups, which have
      manipulated church courts to further their agenda, and
Whereas, this disturbance has further increased the tension felt in the
      PCA, and
Whereas, the purity, peace, and unity of the church is dependent upon a
      mutual trust and respect of Teaching and Ruling Elders, and
Whereas, it is difficult to have that mutual trust and respect, when it is
      unclear whether fellow members of presbyteries are acting in good
      faith in engagement with their brothers, or in accordance with a
      political agenda established outside of the court by members of a
      secretive and exclusive political faction, and


                                  1383
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Whereas, it will only hinder the effectiveness of the PCA to have such
       trust and respect be further disturbed, and
Whereas, the PCA ought to be fully focused on its task to be faithful to
       the Scriptures, true to the Reformed faith, and obedient to the
       Great Commission.
Therefore, be it resolved that the 49th General Assembly call all
       Teaching Elders and Ruling Elders to not participate in secretive
       and exclusive political groups for the purpose of influencing or
       manipulating the church courts according to a particular agenda,
       but rather to engage in good faith with the brothers in their own
       sessions and presbyteries, for the purity, peace, and unity of the
       church.

Submitted by the Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago to Chicago
    Metro Presbytery for its stated meeting, on May 4th, 2022
Rejected by Chicago Metro Presbytery at its stated meeting, May 18th,
    2022 (RAO 11-10). (Attested by /s/ TE Michael Kyle Edwards, stated
    clerk, Chicago Metro Presbytery)
Submitted by the Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago to the 49th
    General Assembly of the PCA, May 19, 2022




                                  1384
                                         APPENDIX X

                     TUESDAY EVENING WORSHIP
                                   June 21, 2022,| 6:30 p.m.

Choral Prelude: “Who Shall Ascend the Mountain…” ............... John Haines
........................................................................................... Choir and Orchestra
* Call to Worship: Psalm 100 ................................. Rev. Dr. Harry L. Reeder
* Hymn of Adoration: “Holy, Holy, Holy”
* Prayer of Adoration: ........................................... Rev. Dr. Harry L. Reeder
* Hymn of Praise: “A Mighty Fortress is Our God”
Scripture Reading: Galatians 2:11-21 ........................... Rev. Dr. Murray Lee
* Hymn of Praise: “Hail! Thou Once Despised Jesus”
Prayer of Intercession ................................................... Rev. Dr. Murray Lee
Offering ......................................................................... Rev. Dr. Murray Lee
Choral Offertory “Breath and Clay (Only Jesus)” ...................... John Haines
                                                                             Concert Choir, and Orchestra
Scripture Reading: Matthew 16:5-12 ......................... Rev. Dr. L. Roy Taylor
Sermon: “Christ’s Warning Against Extremes” .......... Rev. Dr. L. Roy Taylor
Liturgy of the Lord’s Table ............................................... Rev. Brad Allison
      • Prayer of Confession (congregation)
      • Declaration of Forgiveness (Rev. Brad Allison)
      • Confession of Faith (congregation)
      • Invitation to the Lord’s Table (Rev. Brad Allison)
      • Prayer of Humble Access (congregation)
      • Prayer of Consecration/Lord’s Prayer (Rev. Brad Allison and
             congregation)
      • Words of Institution (Rev. Brad Allison)
Serving of the Bread ........................................................... Rev. Brad Allison
Hymn of Response: “How Deep the Father’s Love” ....... J. Haines, Ensemble
Serving of the Cup .............................................................. Rev. Brad Allison
Song of Response: “The Power of the Cross” .................. J. Haines, Ensemble
* Hymn of Thanksgiving: “Let Us Love and Sing…”
* Benediction ............................................................... Rev. Dr. L. Roy Taylor
* Congregation standing.


                                                    1385
MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




  This page intentionally left blank




                1386
                             PART IV

        CORRECTIONS TO PREVIOUS MINUTES
           OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
         Corrections to Minutes of the 48th General Assembly

Correction to p. 135, Churches Lost to the Denomination in 2019
   Delete 2 churches included in error:
   Wisconsin Presbytery
        Faith Reformed, Cedar Grove, WI
        Gibbsville Reformed, Sheboygan Falls, WI

       Note: These two churches were Added in 2019 (p. 135)

Editorial Note regarding Attendance Report, pp. 819ff
    Due to printing issues, names of some TEs and REs may have appeared
    in the wrong column. The final count is correct:
         TEs     1499
         REs      615
         Total 2114




                                 1387
MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY




  This page intentionally left blank




                1388
                            PART V

               REFERENCES AND INDEX

        FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
    OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA
     PRE-ASSEMBLY SCHEDULE AND GENERAL
               ASSEMBLY DOCKET

                 Presbyterian Church in America
             Birmingham Jefferson Convention Center
                Birmingham, AL• June 20-24, 2022
                       (THIRD DRAFT)

                 PRE-ASSEMBLY SCHEDULE
Monday, June 20, 2022
8:00 a.m.    Commissioner Registration Open
10:00 a.m.   Briefing for:
             Overtures Committee (Overtures Committee begins
             immediately after briefing)
11:00 a.m.   Briefing for:
             Committee of Commissioners
12:00 noon   Lunch on your own
1:00 p.m.    Meetings of the Committees of Commissioners begin:
             Administrative Committee
             Retirement and Benefits
             Covenant Theological Seminary
             Reformed University Fellowship
5:00 p.m.    Commissioner Registration Closed
7:00 a.m.    Commissioner Registration Opens
8:00 a.m.    Briefing for Committees of Commissioners
9:00 a.m.    Meetings of the Committees of Commissioners begin:
             Committee on Discipleship Ministries
             Covenant College
             Interchurch Relations
                               1389
                    MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Tuesday, June 21, 2022, Pre-Assembly Schedule, continued
                Mission to North America
                Mission to the World
                PCA Foundation
                Ridge Haven
10:00 a.m.     Meeting of AC/Board of Directors as needed
Noon           Briefing of Floor Clerks
1:30 – 2:30 p.m. Commissioner Welcome Reception in the Exhibit Hall
2:00 p.m.      Committee on Constitutional Business (if necessary)
2:30 – 4:25 p.m. Seminars
                   2:30 - 3:20 p.m. First Session
                   3:35 - 4:25 p.m. Second Session
4:30 - 5:15 p.m.    Pre-Assembly Prayer Meeting
6:30 p.m.       Commissioner Registration Closed
                Commissioner Registration will reopen for 15 minutes at the
                close of worship.


              FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY
                    PROPOSED DOCKET

Only the orders of the day and special orders are fixed times in the docket.
Other items may be taken up earlier or later in the docket, depending upon
the rate at which actions on reports are completed. Therefore, those who
present reports should be prepared to report earlier or later than the
docketed times.
Fraternal Greetings will be made by video at the open and close of sessions
of the General Assembly.

6:00 p.m.       Musical Prelude
6:30 p.m.       Opening Session of the General Assembly
                   Call to Order by the outgoing Moderator: TE L. Roy
                   Taylor (RAO 1-1)
                   Worship Service and Observance of the Lord’s Supper



                                     1390
                                DOCKET



Tuesday, June 21, 2022, Assembly Docket continued

8:10 p.m.     Assembly Reconvenes
                  Report on enrollment and determining of quorum
                  (RAO 1-2)
                  Election of Moderator (RAO 1-3, 1-4, 1-5)
                  Presentation to Retiring Moderator
                  Presentation and Adoption of Docket (RAO 3-2, m.)
                  Election of Recording and Assistant Clerks
                  Appointment of Assistant Parliamentarians (RAO 3-2, i.)
                  Appointment by Moderator of a Committee of Thanks

                  Report of the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly,
                  including:
                      New Churches Added, Statistics, Overtures (RAO
                      11-4 to 11-11)
                      Communications (RAO 11-1, 11-2, 11-3, 11-11)
                      Presbytery Votes on Proposed Amendments to BCO
                      Vote on BCO proposed Amendments approved by
                      Presbyteries
                  Partial Report of the Administrative Committee of
                       Commissioners on proposed RAO Amendments (if
                       needed)

                  Partial Report of the Overtures Committee on proposed RAO
                  Partial Report of the Standing Judicial Commission
                  Cooperative Ministries Committee Report
                  Committee on Constitutional Business Report
                  Theological Examining Committee Report

10:00 pm      Business recess


Wednesday, June 22, 2022
7:45 am       Commissioner Registration Open
8:00 a.m.     Assembly-wide Seminar – The Future Glory of the Church: The
              PCA We Envision for Christ’s Purposes (Ruling Elder
              Perspectives)

                                  1391
                 MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Wednesday, June 22, 2022, continued
9:30 a.m.     Assembly Reconvenes
              Report of the AIC on Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault

10:15 am      Review of Presbytery Records Committee Report
              The RPR report may be amended on the floor. Standard
              rules of debate apply. Minority reports are allowed (RAO
              16-7 h.; 19).
12 noon       Lunch (on your own)

1:30 p.m.     Assembly Reconvenes
              Informational and Committee of Commissioners Reports
              Committee of Commissioners’ Reports are not subject to floor
              amendments. No minority reports are allowed. But alternative
              proposals passed by a majority of the CoC may be presented.
              The Assembly votes on the recommendations to approve,
              disapprove or refer back without instructions (RAO 14-9).
                  Interchurch Relations Committee of Commissioners
                  Report (Fraternal Greetings will be made by video at the
                  open and close of sessions of the General Assembly)
                  PCA Retirement & Benefits
                  Covenant Theological Seminary
                  Reformed University Fellowship
                  Ridge Haven Conference Center
                  PCA Foundation

3:30 p.m.     Standing Judicial Commission Report
4:30 p.m.     Deadline for Nominations from the floor to the
              Nominating Committee at recess (RAO 8-4 i.).
              Meeting of the Nominating Committee
4:45 p.m.     Worship Service
              Commissioner Registration Closed
5:45 p.m.     Recess for Dinner and Fellowship Time
              Meeting of Theological Examining Committee (if necessary)
                                  1392
                                   DOCKET



               Note on Presentation of New Business:
All personal resolutions are new business (RAO 13-1, 13-2, 11-9) and are
to be presented no later than the recess of the afternoon session. A
two-thirds majority vote is required. If the Assembly receives the
resolution, it will be referred by the Stated Clerk to the proper
committee of commissioners.

Thursday, June 23, 2022
7:45 am         Commissioner Registration Open
8:00 a.m.       Assembly Reconvenes
                Minutes of Wednesday Sessions
8:00 a.m.       Informational and Committee of Commissioners Reports
                Committee of Commissioners’ Reports are not subject to
                floor amendments. No minority reports are allowed. But
                alternative proposals passed by a majority of the CoC may
                be presented with responses from the permanent Committee
                or Agency. The Assembly votes on the recommendations to
                approve, disapprove or refer back without instructions
                (RAO 14-9).
                     Covenant College
                     Committee on Discipleship Ministries
                     Mission to the World
                     Mission to North America

9:30 a.m.       Special Order: Nominating Committee Report
                   Administration of vows to SJC members (RAO 17-1)
                   Declaration of SJC as Assembly’s Commission (BCO 15-4)
10:30 a.m.      Informational and Committee of Commissioners Reports
                Administrative Committee
10:45 a.m.      Overtures Committee Report
                The Report of the Overtures Committee may not be amended
                on the floor. The Assembly either approves, disapproves or
                recommits without instructions the recommendations (RAO
                15-8 c.). An OC member may not participate in floor debate

                                      1393
                  MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Thursday, June, 23, 2022 (continued)
               unless he is the designee of the chairman on a specific
               recommendation (RAO 15-8 f.). A minority report is
               permitted (RAO 15-6 s.; 15-8 g) if brought by at least three
               (3) Teaching Elders and three (3) Ruling Elders.
12 noon        Lunch Recess
1:30 p.m.      Assembly Reconvenes
               Overtures Committee Report continued

5:30 p.m.      Recess for Dinner

7:00 p.m.      Musical Prelude
7:30 p.m.      Assembly Reconvenes for Worship Service
9:10 p.m.      Reconvene for business if necessary
               Minutes of Thursday Session
9:15 p.m.      Overtures Committee Report continued
10:00 p.m.     Committee on Thanks Report
               Appointment of Commission to review and approve final
               version of minutes
               Adjournment (BCO 14-8)
               Sing Psalm 133
10:15 p.m.     Apostolic Benediction (II Corinthians 13:14)

Friday, June 24, 2022
8:00 a.m.      Assembly Reconvenes for Business (Optional)
               Facilities are available until noon if agenda requires

Only commissioners with badges will be admitted to the floor of the
Assembly.




                                    1394
                QUICK REFERENCE:
    GENERAL ASSEMBLY SESSIONS AND ITEM NUMBERS
                  DAILY JOURNAL
          FORTY-NINTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY

First Session – Tuesday Evening
49-1 Assembly Called to Order and Opening Worship ............................ 15
49-2 Assembly Reconvened - Declaration of Quorum
        and Enrollment ................................................................................. 15
49-3 Nominations for Moderator .............................................................. 15
49-4 Docket .............................................................................................. 16
49-5 Report of the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly ....................... 16
49-6 Election of Moderator ...................................................................... 16
49-7 Election of Clerks, Assistant Parliamentarians, and
        Committee on Thanks ...................................................................... 16
49-8 Commission to Review Final Minutes ............................................. 17
49-9 BCO Amendments Sent to Presbyteries by 48th Assembly ............. 17
49-10 Vacancies to Be Filled ...................................................................... 17
49-11 Administrative Committee (AC) Committee of
        Commissioners Partial Report .......................................................... 18
49-12 Overtures Committee Partial Report ................................................ 18
49-13 Standing Judicial Commission (SJC) Partial Report ....................... 18
49-14 Cooperative Ministries Committee (CMC) Report .......................... 19
49-15 Procedural Motion to Postpone ........................................................ 19
49-16 Committee on Constitutional Business (CCB) Partial Report.......... 19
49-17 Motion to Postpone CCB Report ...................................................... 19
49-18 Theological Examining Committee (TEC) Report .......................... 19
49-19 Assembly Recessed .......................................................................... 20

Second Session – Wednesday Morning
49-20 Assembly Reconvened and Announcements.................................... 20
49-21 Ad Interim Committee on Domestic Abuse and
       Sexual Assault Report ...................................................................... 20
49-22 Interchurch Relations Video Presentation from NAE ...................... 21
49-23 Review of Presbytery Records (RPR) Committee Partial Report .... 21
49-24 Administrative Committee CoC Partial Report ................................ 23
49-25 Interchurch Relations Committee (IRC) Informational & CoC Reports . 23
49-26 Order of the Day (Lunch) ................................................................. 24
49-27 Assembly Recessed .......................................................................... 24


                                                    1395
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Third Session – Wednesday Afternoon
49-28 Assembly Reconvened ..................................................................... 24
49-29 Interchurch Relations Committee Fraternal Greetings Video .......... 24
49-30 Interchurch Relations CoC Report, continued ................................. 24
49-31 Review of Presbytery Records Committee Report, continued ......... 25
49-32 Protest Regarding NAE Withdrawal ................................................ 26
49-33 PCA Retirement & Benefits (RBI) Informational & CoC Reports ....... 31
49-34 Standing Judicial Commission Report ............................................. 32
49-35 Committee on Constitutional Business (CCB) Partial Report ......... 32
49-36 Covenant Theological Seminary (CTS) Informational & CoC Reports . 33
49-37 Reformed University Fellowship (RUF) Informational & CoC Reports. 37
49-38 Ridge Haven (RH) Informational & CoC Reports ........................... 40
49-39 PCA Foundation Informational & CoC Reports .............................. 42
49-40 Interchurch Relations Committee Fraternal Greetings Video .......... 44
49-41 Assembly Recessed .......................................................................... 44
49-42 Worship Service ............................................................................... 44

Fourth Session – Thursday Morning
49-43 Assembly Reconvened and Announcements ................................... 44
49-44 Interchurch Relations Committee Fraternal Greetings Video .......... 45
49-45 Covenant College (CC) Informational & CoC Reports ................... 45
49-46 Discipleship Ministries (CDM) Informational & CoC Reports ....... 48
49-47 Mission to the World (MTW) Informational & CoC Reports.......... 51
49-48 Mission to North America (MNA) Informational & CoC Reports ...... 54
49-49 Administrative Committee (AC) Reports, continued ....................... 63
49-50 Special Order: Nominating Committee Report ................................ 64
49-51 SJC Vows and Declaration to be Judicial Commission of GA.......... 64
49-52 Administrative Committee Reports, continued ................................... 65
49-53 Protest Denied............................................................................................ 75
49-54 Overtures Committee Report ........................................................... 76
49-55 Order of the Day (Lunch) ................................................................. 79
49-56 Assembly Recessed .......................................................................... 79

Fifth Session – Thursday Afternoon
49-57 Assembly Reconvened ..................................................................... 79
49-58 Interchurch Relations Committee Fraternal Greetings Video .......... 79
49-59 Overtures Committee Report, continued .......................................... 79
49-60 PCA Foundation Supplemental Report .......................................... 135
49-61 Committee on Thanks Report ........................................................ 136
49-62 Adjournment and Benediction ....................................................... 136


                                                      1396
                                                INDEX

                                                    -A-

Abuse
   Victim Protection .................................................................................... 78
Ad Interim Committee
   On Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault................... 20; Appendix V, 949
Adjournment .............................................................................................. 136
Administrative Committee (AC)
   Budget (AC and PCA Building) ........................................................... 215
   Budgets, Committee and Agency.......................................................... 215
       Approval of....................................................................................... 69
   CAO Compensation and Guidelines ..................................................... 201
   Celebration (50th) of PCA ............................................. 73, 203, 209, 216,
   Committee of Commissioners’ Report ................................. 18, 23, 63, 65
   Funding
       Administrative Fee for Ministers.............................................. 72, 208
       Committee/Agency Contributions ............................................ 72, 208
       Presbytery Contributions for GA Host Committees ................. 72, 208
       GA Registration Fee ................................................................. 71, 201
   Future Assemblies......................................................... Inside Front Cover
   Historical Center ................................................................................... 211
   Informational Report ............................................................................... 63
   Overtures Referred to AC
       Overture 1 ................................................................................. 66, 204
       Overture 18 ............................................................................... 68, 205
       Overture 22 .............................................................................. .68, 205
   Partnership Shares ................................................................................. 206
   Permanent Committee Members ............................................................... 7
   Permanent Committee Report .......................................... Appendix C, 191
   Statistical Records – Reporting ....................................................... 73, 209
   Statistical Records – Digital Access ..................................................... 205
   Study Committees .......................................... See Ad Interim Committees
   Trademarks (PCA) .................................................................................. 74
   Unfunded Mandates ................................................................ 70, 201, 207
Agencies of PCA - membership ................................................................... 10
Anniversary (PCA 50th) ........................................................................... 153
Appeals ................................................................................See Judicial Cases
Appointments
   Assistant Parliamentarians ...................................................................... 16
        ................................................................................. See also Elections

                                                    1397
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



    Commission to Approve GA Minutes .................................................... 17
    Committee on Thanks ............................................................................. 16
Archives .......................................................................... See Historical Center
Attendance ............................................................................ Appendix S, 639
Auditors & Audit Reports
    Capin, Crouse, LLP
        (for CC) ............................................................................................ 46
        (for CTS) .......................................................................................... 36
        (for MNA) ................................................................................ 56, 206
        (for MTW) ............................................................................... 52, 206
        (for PCAF) ....................................................................................... 42
        (for RBI) .......................................................................... ix (after 684)
    Carr, Riggs & Ingram LLP (for RUF) .................................................. 207
    Robins, Eskew, Smith & Jordan, PC6
        (for AC) .......................................................................................... 206
        (for CDM) ................................................................................ 49, 206
        (for PCA Building) ......................................................................... 206
        (for RH) ............................................................................................ 40

                                                     -B-

BCO ................................................................... See Book of Church Order
Building (PCA)
   Occupancy Cost .................................................................................... 208
Board of Directors Minutes (PCA) ..................................... Appendix B, 185
Book of Church Order (BCO)
   Amendments Finally Adopted by 49th GA (2ndvote)
       BCO 12-6; 13-4 ........................................................................ 17, 155
       BCO 20-4; 24-3; 24-4............................................................... 17, 160
       BCO 22-2 ................................................................................. 17, 166
       BCO 24-1 ................................................................................. 17, 168
       BCO 32-20 ............................................................................... 17, 171
       BCO 38-1 ................................................................................. 17, 173
   Amendments Adopted by 49th GA (1st vote) and Sent to Presbyteries
       BCO 7-4 ......................................................................................... 100
       BCO 8-8 ......................................................................................... 106
       BCO 15-1, 15-3 ...................................................................... 103, 106
       BCO 16-4 ................................................................. 97, 102, 103, 107
       BCO 21-4, 24-1 .............................................................................. 108
       BCO 31-10, 33-4 ........................................................................ 90, 95
       BCO 33-1, 34-1 ................................................................................ 95


                                                     1398
                                                     INDEX



       BCO 35:1-5....................................................................................... 92
       BCO 38-1 .......................................................................................... 91
       BCO 38-1, 42-2 ................................................................................ 90
       BCO 42-6 .................................................................................... 91, 95
       BCO 43-2, 43-3 .............................................................................. 102
   Translations of
       Korean ............................................................................................ 216
       Portuguese ...................................................................................... 216
       Spanish .......................................................................................... 216
Boundaries .................................... See Presbytery Formation and Boundaries
Budgets ....................................................................................................... 215
   Administrative....................................................................................... 215
   Approvals ................................................................................................ 69
   Building (PCA) ..................................................................................... 221
   Committee on Discipleship Ministries .................................................. 224
   Covenant College .................................................................................. 231
   Covenant Theological Seminary ........................................................... 237
   Mission to North America .................................................................... 244
   Mission to the World ........................................................................... 250
   PCA Foundation.................................................................................... 258
   PCA Retirement and Benefits, Inc. ....................................................... 265
   Reformed University Fellowship .......................................................... 277
   Ridge Haven.......................................................................................... 271
Building (PCA), Occupancy Charge ............................................................ 71
ByFaith (PCA Magazine) .............................................................................. 73

                                                      -C-

Campus Ministries................................ See Reformed University Fellowship
CAO Compensation Guidelines ............................................................... 201
CCB ......................................... See Constitutional Business, Committee on
Chaplain Ministries ................................. See also Mission to North America
   Presbyterian and Reformed Commission on Chaplains and
   Military Personnel (PRCC) ................................................................... 325
   Report on MNA Chaplain Ministries ....................................................... 333
Christian Education and Publications (CEP)
        .............................. See Committee on Discipleship Ministries (CDM)
Christmas Offering .................................................................... See Offerings
Church Planting/Church Planters ................ See Mission to North America
Churches Added in 2021 ........................................................................... 176
Churches Lost in 2021 ............................................................................... 176
                                                       1399
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Committee on Discipleship Ministries
  Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 224
  Committee of Commissioners Report..................................................... 48
  Great Commission Publications (GCP) ........................................ 287, 291
  Informational Report............................................................................... 48
  Love Gift Legacy
      2022 ................................................................................................ 287
  Permanent Committee members ............................................................... 8
  Permanent Committee Report ..........................................Appendix D, 283
  Women's Ministry................................................................................. 285

Committees and Agencies (Ministries) of GA
  Listed ........................................................................................................ 6
  Membership .............................................................................................. 7
  Resignations.................................................................................... 17, 151

Committees of Commissioners ....See Reports, Committees of Commissioners
Communications to GA ........................................................................... N/A
Compassion [Relief and Mercy] Offering ............................... See Offerings
Compensation Guidelines, CAO .............................................................. 201
Complaints         ................................................................... See Judicial Cases
Constitutional Business, Committee on (CCB)
   Advice to Stated Clerk .................................................................. 426. 428
   Committee Members ............................................................................ 428
   Election of Officers............................................................................... 427
   Minority Report .............................................................................. 32, 435
   Non-judicial References ....................................................................... 427
   Overtures, Advice on .................................................................... 419. 430
   Report ................................................................................................ 19,32
   RAO, Advice on .................................................................................... 428
   SJC Minutes Review.......................................... 19, 33, 427, 429, 432,435
Cooperative Ministries Committee (CMC) Report .......................... 19, 411
Coordinators/Presidents (of PCA Committees and Agencies) .................. 6
Corrections to Previous Minutes............................................................ 1387
Covenant College (CC)
   Agency Board Members ......................................................................... 10
   Agency Report ................................................................. Appendix E, 293
   Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 231
   Committee of Commissioners Report..................................................... 45
   Prayer for Covenant College (Oct. 16, 2022) ......................................... 46
   Informational Report............................................................................... 45
                                                       1400
                                                    INDEX



Covenant Theological Seminary (CTS)
   Agency Board Members ......................................................................... 11
   Agency Report ................................................................. Appendix F, 299
   Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 237
   Committee of Commissioner Report ...................................................... 34
   Informational Report ............................................................................... 33

                                                      -D-

Days of Prayer................................................................................. See Prayer
Docket ...................................................................................................... 1389
   Adoption of ............................................................................................. 16
Domestic Abuse..................................................... See Ad Interim Committee

                                                      -E-

Elections
    Committees and Agencies.............................. See Nominating Committee
    Moderator................................................................................................ 16
    Clerks, Assistant Parliamentarians, Committee on Thanks .................... 16
    Stated Clerk of PCA General Assembly ................................................. 66
Electronic Voting (at GA) ........................................... See General Assembly
Enrollment of Commissioners .............................................. See Attendance

                                                         -F-

Fiftieth Anniversary (PCA) ...................................................................... 153
Foundation ..................................................................... See PCA Foundation
Fraternal Greetings (via video)
    Pastor Dwang-Sik Bae, Korean Presbyterian Church, Hapdong ............ 24
    Dr. Chad Van Dixhoorn, Orthodox Presbyterian Church ....................... 24
    Dr. Davi Gomes, Presbyterian Church of Brazil .................................... 45
    Dr. Walter Kim, National Association of Evangelicals................................. 21
    Rev. Todd De Rooy, United Reformed Churches of North America ..... 79
    Dr. Dean Weaver. Evangelical Presbyterian Church .................................... 44
    Dr. Dennis Johnson, Rafaki .................................................................... 25
    Dr. William Zulu, Reformed Church of Zambia .................................... 25
    Dr. Clement Mwanza, Reformed Church of Zambia .............................. 25




                                                      1401
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



                                                      -G-

General Assembly
   AC General Assembly Responsibilities (Costs) ..................................... 70
   Committees and Agencies of, membership .............................................. 7
   Costs (Unfunded Mandates) ................................................................... 70
   Electronic Voting ........................................................................ 16, 21, 33
   Future GA Locations .................................................... Inside Front Cover
   Ministries of .............................................................................................. 6
   Minutes, Commission for Review of ...................................................... 17
   Officers of ................................................................................................. 5
   Registration Fee for 2023 ....................................................................... 71
   Special Committees of, Membership ...................................................... 13
   Standing Judicial Commission, Membership ......................................... 14
Geneva Benefits ............................................See PCA Retirement & Benefits
Great Commission Publications ....................................................... 287, 291

                                                      -H-

Historical Center (PCA Archives) ........................................................... 211
Host Presbytery (49th General Assembly) ................................................ 16

                                                      -I-

Informational Reports ...................... See specific Committees and Agencies
Interchurch Relations Committee (IRC)
    Committee Members .............................................................................. 13
    Committee of Commissioners Report.......................... 23, 24, i (after 684)
    Fraternal Greetings, Video Presentations ........................... 21,24,44,45,79
    Fraternal Delegates ............................................................................ 24,25
    Informational Report......................................................................... 23, 24
    NAE (National Association of Evangelicals) ......... i (after 684), 412, 414
    NAPARC (North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council) .. 412. 414
    Overture 3 ........................................................ 23, 24, 25, i (after p. 684)
    Special [Permanent] Committee Report ..........................Appendix N, 412
    World Reformed Fellowship ................................................ 412, 413. 414

                                                      -J-

Journal (Daily Journal of GA) ................ 15; See also Quick Reference, 1395
Judicial Cases
Cases 2021-06, 2021-09, 2021-10, 2021-11, 2021-13, 2021-14,
           2021-15, 2022-01, 2022-02, and 2022-04 ........................ In Panel

                                                      1402
                                                  INDEX



2020-07          Wilbourne v. Pacific Presbytery ...........................Completed, 687
2020-08          Gendall et al v. Pacific Presbytery .......................Completed, 687
2020-09          Ozbalt et al v. Pacific Presbytery ..........................Completed, 687
2020-06          Gordon v. Southern New England Presbytery ......Completed, 702
2020-14          Myers v. Illiana Presbytery ...................................Completed, 720
2021-01          Michelson v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery ........Completed, 726
2021-02          Tippins v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery .............Completed, 727
2020-10          Eagle v. Savannah River Presbytery .....................Completed, 728
2021-05          Eudaly, et al. v. Southwest Florida Presbytery .....Completed, 728
2021-08          In the matter of Korean Southwest Orange County
                  ..............................................................................Completed, 729
2020-12          Speck v. Missouri Presbytery ...............................Completed, 730
2021-12          Michelson & Michelson v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery
                  ..............................................................................Completed, 822
2020-02          In the matter of PCA v. Missouri Presbytery ........Completed, 825
2020-05          Speck v. Missouri Presbytery .............................Completed, 826
2021-03          DeJong v. Session of Village Seven Presbyterian Church
                  ..............................................................................Completed, 864
2021-07          Acree v. Tennessee Valley Presbytery ..................Completed, 869
2021-08          Citation of Korean Southwest Orange Presbytery
                  ..............................................................................Completed, 870
2021-09          Miller v. Ohio Valley Presbytery ..........................Completed, 876
2021-10          Williams v. Chesapeake Presbytery .....................Completed, 885
2021-13          Dudt v. Northwest Georgia Presbytery .................Completed, 892
2021-06          Herron v. Central Indiana Presbytery ...................Completed, 916
2022-01          Eagle, et al. v. Savannah River Presbytery
                  .............................................. Administratively Out of Order, 934

                                                   -K-

                                                    -L-

Life-line Children's Services ....................................................................... 56
Love Gift Legacy.......................... See Committee on Discipleship Ministries

                                                   -M-

Military ....................................................................... See Chaplain Ministries
Ministers
   Added in 2021 ....................................................................................... 177
   Deceased in 2021 .................................................................................. 183

                                                    1403
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



   Dismissed in 2021................................................................................. 181
   Removed in 2021 .................................................................................. 182
Ministry Asks ................................................................ See Partnership Share
Minority Reports . See Overtures Committee; Review of Presbytery Records
Minutes, GA
   Commission Appointed to Approve ....................................................... 17
   Daily Journal ........................................................................................... 15
Mission to North America (MNA)
   Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 244
   Chaplain Ministries ..................................................... See Chaplain Ministries,
   Church Planting ............................................................................ 322, 324
       Church Planters Placed on Field .................................................... 332
   Committee of Commissioners Report..................................................... 55
   Informational Report............................................................................... 54
   Overtures Referred to MNA
       Overture 2021-13 ............................................................. 56, 326, 342
   Permanent Committee Members .............................................................. 8
   Permanent Committee Report .........................................Appendix G, 320
   Presbytery Boundaries ............. See Presbytery Formation and Boundaries
Mission to the World (MTW)
   Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 250
   Committee of Commissioners Report..................................................... 51
   Global Ministry Highlights ................................................................... 345
   Informational Report............................................................................... 51
   Missionaries, listed
       Long-Term ..................................................................................... 360
       Two-Year ....................................................................................... 363
       Retiring ............................................................................................. 34
   Prayer, Day of, for the Persecuted Church (November 6, 2022) ............ 52
   Prayer, Month of, for Global Missions (November 2022)...................... 52
   Offering, Compassion ............................................................................. 52
   Permanent Committee Members .............................................................. 9
   Permanent Committee Report..........................................Appendix H, 343
   Statistics ................................................................................................ 354
Moderators
   Election of, RE John R Bise ................................................................... 16
   Retiring Moderator, TE L. Roy Taylor ................................................... 16
   Succession of ............................................................................................ 4




                                                      1404
                                                    INDEX



                                                     -N-

NAE (National Association of Evangelicals) ........ See Interchurch Relations
NAPARC (North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council
       ..................................................................... See Interchurch Relations
Negative Votes
   Overture 15 ............................................................................................. 80
   Overture 26 ............................................................................................. 87
Nominating Committee
   Elections.................................................................................................. 64
   Report......................................................................... 64; Appendix P, 437
   Floor Nominations ......................................................................... 64; 471
   Supplemental Report ....................................................... Appendix P, 469

                                                     -O-

Officers, Church, Requirements for ............................. See Overtures; BCO
Officers, General Assembly .......................................................................... 5
Offerings
    Offering, Compassion (MTW)................................................................ 52
    Offering, Ministerial Relief ................................................... ix (after 684)
Overtures Committee
    Committee Report ........................................................................... 18, 76, 89
    Minority Reports (Overtures 8, 15, 26, 42) ...................... 117, 125, 129, 131

OVERTURES to 49th General Assembly
OVERTURE 2021-19 (48th GA) from Pacific NW Presbytery (to 49th OC)
     "Amend BCO 38-1 & 42-2 to Allow Appealing a Censure in a
     Case without Process" ...................................................... 77, 90, 1267
OVERTURE 2021-20 (48th GA) from Pacific NW Presbytery (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 31-10 and 33-4 on Pre-trial Non-Disciplinary
     Suspensions” .................................................................... 77, 90, 1273
OVERTURE 2021-21 (48th GA) from Pacific NW Presbytery (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 42-6 on Vote Required for Maintaining Censure
     during an Appeal” ............................................................ 77, 91, 1275
OVERTURE 2021-34 (48th GA] from Pacific NW Presbytery (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 38-1 re Confession Timing for Case Without Process"
     .......................................................................................... 77, 91, 1276
OVERTURE 2021-35 (48th GA) from Pacific NW Presbytery (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 38-1 re Counsel for Case Without Process” ... 77, 91,1277


                                                      1405
                            MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 2021-40 (48th GA) from TN Valley Presbytery .. (to 49th OC)
     “Amend BCO 32-13 and 35-5 to Allow Victim Protection Provisions
     .......................................................................................... 78, 92, 1281
OVERTURE 2021-41 (48th GA) from TN Valley Presbytery (to 49th OC)
     "Amend BCO 35-1 to Expand Potential Witness Eligibility"78, 95, 1285
OVERTURE 1 from Palmetto Presbytery (to AC)
     “Docket Overtures Committee Report as a GA Order of the Day”
     ................................................................................................ 18, 1286
OVERTURE 2 from Tennessee Valley Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 22-3 to Allow Assistant Pastors to file Complaints
     against Sessions” .............................................................. 77, 95, 1286
OVERTURE 3 from Pee Dee Presbytery (to IRC)
     “Withdraw from the National Association of Evangelicals” . 23, 1287
     Protest................................................................................... 25, 26, 27
OVERTURE 4 - Vacated
OVERTURE 5 - Vacated
OVERTURE 6 from Nashville Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 31-10 and 33-4 Regarding Suspensions during
     Process or Delay” ............................................................. 77, 95, 1290
OVERTURE 7 from Nashville Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
      “Amend BCO 42-6 Regarding Suspending Judgment during Appeal”
     .......................................................................................... 77, 95, 1292
OVERTURE 8 from Houston Metro Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 33-1 and BCO 34-1 Establishing Percentage Threshold
     for Original Jurisdiction Requests” .................................. 86, 95, 1296
     Minority Report ........................................................................ 85, 117
OVERTURE 9 from Calvary Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 34-1 to Establish Percentage Threshold for Original
     Jurisdiction Requests” ...................................................... 77, 97, 1297
OVERTURE 10 from Southwest Florida Presbytery (to MNA)
     “Restructure Boundary of the Presbytery of Southwest Florida” .... 1298
OVERTURE 11 from Korean Capital Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 25-2.e and Add a New Item BCO 25-2.f, New
     Percentage Threshold for Calling Large Church Congregational
     Meetings” ........................................................................ 77, 97, 1299
OVERTURE 12 from Hills and Plains Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding a New Paragraph BCO 16-4 with
     Wording from the Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Human
     Sexuality” ......................................................................... 77, 97, 1301
OVERTURE 13 from Ascension Presbytery (to OC)
     “Petition United States Government to End Abortion”.... 77, 98, 1302
                                                    1406
                                                   INDEX



OVERTURE 14 from Westminster Presbytery (to CSCB, OC; to SJC for
                                                            OMSJC only)
     “Change the Composition of the SJC by Amending BCO 15-4 and
     RAO 17-1; Amend OMSJC 5.1 and 6.1” ........................ 77, 100, 1306
OVERTURE 15 from Westminster Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 7 to Disqualify from Office Men Identifying as
     Homosexual” .......................................................... 80, 100, 125, 1312
           Minority Report ...............................................................80, 125
           Negative Votes .........................................................................80
OVERTURE 16 from TE Ted Lester (to CCB, OC)\
     “Amend BCO 25-2 to Require Annual Congregational Meeting and
     Reporting Standards” ..................................................... 77, 101, 1314
OVERTURE 17 from TE Ted Lester (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 32-3 to Require Open Proceedings for Trials” ... 77, 101,
     1317
OVERTURE 18 from Pacific Northwest Presbytery (to CCB, AC)
     “Amend RAO 3-2 by Adding an Administrative Responsibility for the
     Stated Clerk’s Office Regarding the Processing of Allegations.” 1320
OVERTURE 19 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 15-2 Regarding Presbytery Commission Membership
     and Quorum” .................................................................. 77, 101, 1323
OVERTURE 20 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding Paragraph 16-4 on Qualifications for
     Ordination” ...................................................................... 77, 102 1324
OVERTURE 21 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 43-2 and 43-3 Regarding Timing for Considering a
     Complaint” ..................................................................... 77, 102, 1326
OVERTURE 22 from Northwest Georgia Presbytery (CCB, AC)
     “Amend RAO 3-2.h, Making Statistical Data Digitally Accessible”
     ...................................................................................................... 1328
OVERTURE 23 from Southeast Alabama Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding Paragraph 16-4 on Qualifications for
     Ordination” ..................................................................... 77, 103, 1329
OVERTURE 24 from Houston Metro Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend RAO 11-2 and 11-10 to Clarify Who May Submit an
     Overture” ........................................................................ 18, 103, 1332
OVERTURE 25 from Houston Metro Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 15-1 and 15-3 to Clarify Role of Presbytery
     Commission” .................................................................. 77, 103, 1334



                                                     1407
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



OVERTURE 26 from Potomac Presbytery (to OC)
     “Statement On Political Violence” ................................. 87, 106, 1337
     Minority Report ................................................................................ 86
     Negative Votes ................................................................................. 87
OVERTURE 27 from Potomac Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 15-1 and 15-3 To Clarify Role of Presbytery
     Commission” .................................................................. 77, 106, 1339
OVERTURE 28 from Pittsburgh Presbytery (to CCB, OC; to MNA for advice)
     “Amend BCO 8-7 by Adding Chaplain Endorsement Requirements
     and Recommendations”.................................................. 77, 106, 1342
OVERTURE 29 from Pittsburgh Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 16 by Adding 16-4 Regarding Qualifications for
     Church Office” ............................................................... 77, 107, 1344
OVERTURE 30 from Pittsburgh Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 6-5, 20-3, 25-1, and 24-3, Allowing Congregations to
     Establish Voting Age Restrictions”................................ 77, 108, 1345
OVERTURE 31 from Pittsburgh Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend BCO 21-4 and 24-1 by Adding Paragraphs Regarding
     Requirements for Ordination” ........................................ 77, 108, 1348
OVERTURE 32 from Tennessee Valley Presbytery (to CCB, OC)
     “Amend RAO 8.4 to Add an Item to the Annual Report of the GA
     Nominating Committee” ............................................... 18, 111, 1352
OVERTURE 33 from Nashville Presbytery (to OC)
     “Use Human Sexuality Report for Study, Examination, and Conciliation”
     ........................................................................................ 77, 112, 1355
OVERTURE 34 from Metro Atlanta Presbytery (to OC)
     “Use Human Sexuality Report for Study, Examination, and Conciliation”
      ................................................................................................ 77, 112, 1360
OVERTURE 35 from North Florida Presbytery (to OC)
     “Use Human Sexuality Report for Study, Assessment, and Conciliation”
      ................................................................................................ 77, 112, 1365
OVERTURE 36 from Southeast Alabama Presbytery (to SJC)
     "BCO 34-1 Request to Assume Original Jurisdiction over
     TE Greg Johnson" ....................................................................... 1369
OVERTURE 37 from Grace Presbytery (to SJC)
     "BCO 34-1 Request to Assume Original Jurisdiction over TE Greg
     Johnson" ...................................................................................... 1372
OVERTURE 38 from Chesapeake Presbytery (to SJC)
     “Request for SJC to Assume Original Jurisdiction in CIP matters re
     Dan Herron” ................................................................................. 1376


                                                      1408
                                                    INDEX



OVERTURE 39 from Northern California Presbytery (to SJC)
     “Request for SJC to Assume Original Jurisdiction in CIP matters re
     Dan Herron” ................................................................................. 1378
OVERTURE 40 from the Northern New England Presbytery (to SJC)
     “Request for SJC to Assume Original Jurisdiction in CIP matters re
     Dan Herron” ................................................................................. 1380
OVERTURE 41 from the Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago (to OC)
     “Declare Critical Race Theory Flawed” ......................... 78, 113, 1381
OVERTURE 42 from the Session of Bethel Christian Church-Chicago (to OC)
     “Forbid TE and RE Participation in ‘Political Groups’” 88, 113, 1383
           Minority Report ...............................................................88, 131

                                                     -P-

Parliamentarians, Assistant ........................................................................ 16
Partnership Shares (including Ministry Asks) ................................. 69, 281
PCA Foundation (PCAF)
   Agency Board Members ......................................................................... 11
   Agency Report .................................................................. Appendix I, 365
   Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 258
   Committee of Commissioners Report ..................................................... 42
       Supplemental CoC Report .............................................................. 135
   Informational Report ............................................................................... 42
PCA Office Building
   Budget ................................................................................................... 221
   Occupancy Cost for Committees and Agencies ...................................... 71
PCA Retirement and Benefits, Inc. (RBI) – now Geneva Benefits
   Agency Board Members ......................................................................... 12
   Agency Report .................................................................. Appendix J, 375
   Budgets ........................................................................................... 69, 265
   Committee of Commissioners Report ........................ 31, viii (after p. 684)
   Informational Report ............................................................................... 31
   Offering, Ministerial Relief ................................................... ix (after 684)
Prayer, Days/Months of
   Covenant College (October 16, 2022) .................................................... 46
   MTW Day of Prayer for Persecuted Church (November 6, 2022) .................. 52
   MTW Month of Prayer for Global Missions (November 2022) ............. 52
PRCC (Presbyterian and Reformed Commission)
   on Chaplains and Military Personnel) .............. see Chaplain Ministries
Presbytery Formation and Boundaries .................................................. N/A


                                                      1409
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Protest (Overture 3) ................................................................................ 25, 26
   Signatories .............................................................................................. 27

                                                      -Q-

Quick Reference of GA Sessions ............................................................ 1395
Quorum ........................................................................................................ 15

                                                      -R-

RAO ....................................................... See Rules of Assembly Operations
RBI    ...................................................See PCA Retirement & Benefits, Inc.
Reformed University Fellowship (RUF)
   Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 277
   Campus Interns Roster .......................................................................... 404
   Campus Ministries and Staff................................................................. 392
   Committee of Commissioners’ Report ................................................... 37
   Informational Report............................................................................... 37
   Permanent Committee Members .............................................................. 9
   Permanent Committee Report ..........................................Appendix K, 384
   Presbytery Campus Committees ........................................................... 392
Registration Fee
   2023 General Assembly .......................................... See General Assembly
Reports
 Committees of Commissioners
   Administrative ...................................................................... 18, 23, 63, 65
   Committee on Discipleship Ministries ................................................... 48
   Covenant College.................................................................................... 45
   Covenant Theological Seminary ............................................................. 34
   Interchurch Relations ............................................................... i (after 684)
   Mission to North America ...................................................................... 55
   Mission to the World .............................................................................. 51
   PCA Foundation ..................................................................................... 42
   PCA Retirement and Benefits, Inc. ...................................... viii (after 684)
   Reformed University Fellowship ............................................................ 37
   Ridge Haven ........................................................................................... 40
 Permanent Committees and Agencies, Special Committees, and SJC
   Administrative ................................................................. Appendix C, 191
   Committee on Discipleship Ministries ............................Appendix D, 283
   Constitutional Business Committee .................................Appendix O, 419
   Covenant College............................................................. Appendix E, 293


                                                      1410
                                                   INDEX



   Covenant Theological Seminary ...................................... Appendix F, 299
   Interchurch Relations ...................................................... Appendix N, 412
   Mission to North America .............................................. Appendix G, 320
   Mission to the World ...................................................... Appendix H, 343
   Nominating Committee .................................................... Appendix P, 437
   PCA Foundation................................................................ Appendix I, 365
   PCA Retirement and Benefits, Inc. ................................... Appendix J, 375
   Reformed University Fellowship .................................... Appendix K, 384
   Review of Presbytery Records ......................................... Appendix R, 482
   Ridge Haven..................................................................... Appendix L, 408
   Standing Judicial Commission ......................................... Appendix T, 685
   Stated Clerk..................................................................... Appendix A, 139
   Thanks ............................................................................. Appendix U, 947
   Theological Examining Committee ................................ Appendix Q, 479
Retirement & Benefits, Inc. (RBI) ....... See PCA Retirement & Benefits, Inc.
Review of Presbytery Records (RPR)
   General Recommendations ................................................................... 483
   Minutes of Presbyteries, reviewed ........................................................ 486
        Recommendation V.6 – RAO 16-4.c ................................................ 21
        Recommendation VI.34............................................................ 21, 549
        Recommendation VI.56.e ............................................. 21, 23, 25, 597
   Officers Elected .................................................................................... 636
   Report ........................................................................ 21, Appendix R, 482
Ridge Haven (RH)
   Agency Board Members ......................................................................... 12
   Agency Report ................................................................. Appendix L, 408
   Budget ............................................................................................. 69, 271
   Committee of Commissioners Report ..................................................... 40
   Informational Report ............................................................................... 40
Rules of Assembly Operations (RAO)
   RAO Amendments adopted
        RAO 3-2.h – from AC................................................................. 23, 68
        RAO 11-2 and 11-10 – from Overtures Committee .......................... 18
        RAO 16-4.c – from RPR ........................................................... 21, 485

                                                    -S-

Sexuality .................................................................................... See Overtures
Special Days ........................................................ See Prayer, Days/Months of
Special Offerings........................................................................ See Offerings


                                                     1411
                             MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



Standing Judicial Commission (SJC)
    Commission Members ............................................................................ 14
    Judicial Cases (listed) ................................................................... 686, 875
    Judicial Commission of the Assembly.................................................... 64
    Minutes (Review by CCB) ................................................................... 427
    Officers for New Year ............................................................................ 64
    Oath of Office ......................................................................................... 64
    Operating Manual – Changes Adopted ........................................... 18, 871
    Protest Denied ......................................................................................... 75
    SJC Report .......................................................... 18, 32; Appendix T, 685
        Supplemental Report ...................................................................... 875
Stated Clerk (of General Assembly)
    Succession of Stated Clerks ...................................................................... 4
    Stated Clerk Elected to New Term ................................................... 65, 66
Stated Clerk’s Report ....................................................16; Appendix A, 139
    BCO Votes .................................................................................... 146, 155
    Candidates – referral to Theological Examining Committee................ 148
    Legal Matters ........................................................................................ 152
    Interchurch Relations ............................................................................ 147
    Overtures............................................................................................... 145
    PCA – State of the Church.................................................................... 141
    Resignations from GA Committees and Agencies ............................... 151
    Standing Judicial Commission.............................................................. 149
    Statistics – Five-Year Summary .......................................................... 184
    Statistics (2021) ................................................................................... 176
        Churches Added ............................................................................. 176
        Churches Lost................................................................................. 176
        Ministers Added ............................................................................. 177
        Ministers Dismissed ...................................................................... 181
        Ministers Removed ........................................................................ 182
        Ministers Deceased ........................................................................ 183
Study Committee .................................................. See Ad Interim Committee

                                                        -T-

Telecommunication Meetings ....................... See Videoconference Meetings
Thanks (Committee On)
    Appointed ............................................................................................... 16
    Resolution of Thanks ...............................................136; Appendix U, 947



                                                     1412
                                                   INDEX



Theological Examining Committee
   Members ................................................................................................. 13
   Report........................................................................ 19; Appendix Q, 479
Translations (of BCO and Other Documents ............................................. 150

                                                    -U-

                                                    -V-

Video Conference Meetings (Overture 2021-26) ...................................... 155

                                               -W-
Women's Ministry (PCA - CDM)
       ................................ See Committee on Discipleship Ministry (CDM)
World Reformed Fellowship (WRF) ................................................... 412, 413
Worship Services .................................................. 15, 44; Appendix X, 1385

                                                - X, Y, Z -




                                                     1413
MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY



             Notes




             1414
