  Missouri Presbytery Ad Hoc Committee to Investigate Memorial Presbyterian Church
                   for Hosting the Revoice 18 Conference in July 2018

                                          Full Report


Presented to the Missouri Presbytery of the Presbyterian Church in America at its called meeting
on May 18, 2019.

The following actions were taken at this called meeting:
       1. The entire report was received by Presbytery;
       2. The Judicial Judgment was adopted by Presbytery;
       3. Theological Judgments #1-9, and their Arguments were approved by Missouri
          Presbytery as being, in general substance, consistent with Holy Scripture and our
          confessional standards, the Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechisms;
       4. The Commendations and Recommendations were adopted by Presbytery;
       5. An overture to General Assembly drafted by this committee was adopted by Presbytery.
          It petitions the GA to erect an ad interim study/consensus-building committee on these
          sensitive issues. The full overture is included in the appendices of this report.




                                                                                               1
                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS



I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                              4

A.      A LETTER FROM THE COMMITTEE                                                              4
B.      OUR COMMITTEE’S CHARGE                                                                   8
C.      COMMITTEE MEMBERS                                                                       10
D.      PRINCIPLES OF INQUIRY AND JUDGMENT                                                      10
E.      GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS IN THIS COMMITTEE REPORT                            15

II.    CONTEXT                                                                                  20

A.      HISTORY AND CONTEXT OF REVOICE                                                          20
B.      TIMELINE OF EVENTS                                                                      23
C.      COMMENTARY ON TIMELINE                                                                  25
D.      SUMMARY OF RECEIVED CORRESPONDENCE                                                      27

III.    SUMMARY OF ALLEGATIONS AND JUDGMENTS                                                    29

A.      JUDICIAL ALLEGATION AND JUDGMENT                                                        29
B.      THEOLOGICAL ALLEGATIONS AND JUDGMENTS                                                   29

IV.    JUDICIAL AND THEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT                                                      35

A.      THEOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES                                                                  35
B.      INTRODUCTION TO ALLEGATIONS, JUDGMENTS, AND ARGUMENTS                                   47
C.      JUDICIAL ALLEGATION, JUDGMENT, AND ARGUMENT                                             48
        JUDICIAL J UDGMENT: ON THE CONDUCT OF TE JOHNSON AND THE MEMORIAL SESSION               48
D.      THEOLOGICAL ALLEGATIONS, JUDGMENTS, AND ARGUMENTS                                       52
        ALLEGATION #1: ON THE QUESTION OF THE ORIGINS AND MORAL STATUS OF HOMOEROTIC DESIRE     52
        ALLEGATION #2: ON THE QUESTION OF TERMINOLOGY                                           61
        ALLEGATION #3: ON THE QUESTION OF MORALLY BENIGN QUALITIES TIED TO HOMOEROTIC DESIRE    72
        ALLEGATION #4: ON THE LEGITIMACY OF AN SSA OR GAY IDENTITY                              76
        ALLEGATION #5: ON THE ISSUE OF FRIENDSHIP AND ROMANCE                                   84
        ALLEGATION #6: ON THE QUESTION OF CREATING GAY “SPACES”                                 92
        ALLEGATION #7: ON WHETHER THERE WILL BE “QUEER TREASURE” IN HEAVEN                      96
        ALLEGATION #8: ON THE QUESTION OF THE ANALOGY OF JEREMIAH AND SSA BELIEVERS            101
        ALLEGATION #9: ON THE PRESENCE OF ROMAN C ATHOLIC SPEAKERS                             105
E.      CONCLUDING STATEMENT ON JUDGMENTS OF ALLEGATIONS                                       107



                                                                                                 2
V.    COMMENDATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                     110

A.     TO REVOICE                                                           110
B.     TO MEMORIAL PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH                                      110
C.     TO MISSOURI PRESBYTERY                                               111

VI.    APPENDICES                                                           112

A.     APPENDIX 1: MISSOURI PRESBYTERY’S OVERTURE TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY   112
B.     APPENDIX 2: CALVARY’S LETTER OF CONCERN TO MISSOURI PRESBYTERY       115
C.     APPENDIX 3: TE JOHNSON’S PUBLIC COMMUNICATIONS REGARDING REVOICE     124




                                                                              3
I.   INTRODUCTION
A. A Letter from the Committee
In I John we are told that, “There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear. For fear has to
do with punishment, and whoever fears has not been perfected in love.” In the modern church,
there may not be a topic that stokes more fear than that of homosexuality. Even many well-
intentioned pastors won’t talk about it out of fear of offending their congregations. In this report
we have been tasked with talking about it in a narrow sense, in connection with Memorial
Presbyterian Church. However, by being tasked with assessing Revoice as a phenomenon, we have
been tasked with talking about it in a wider sense, as we suspect that many in the wider church
may be interested in this report as well.
First, there is the fear many of us have about the influence of the sexual revolution on our nation.
Who would have believed even twenty years ago that almost every TV show would have gay
characters, that children as young as seven would be encouraged to embrace a transgendered
identity and march in Pride parades, or that Christians could be facing jail time for refusing to
participate in gay weddings? Many of the people we have read and spoke to who are critical of
Revoice expressed this type of fear. These brothers and sisters are wondering if Revoice is proof
that the very same ideas from the sexual revolution that have led to so much sexual confusion in
our nation are finding their way into our churches and seminaries—the very places that should be
helping people see just how ungodly the sexual revolution truly is.
Second, there is the fear felt by our brothers and sisters in Christ (and often shared by their families
and close friends) who know firsthand what it means to experience same-sex attractions. They
know the fear of wondering what might happen to them if their churches discovered their sexuality.
They, along with their family and friends, are looking on, anxious that if the PCA rejects Revoice
it will be a confirmation of their fear that the church really wants to reject them—and ultimately
that there is no place for them in conservative denominations like ours.
And lastly, as a committee, we recognize our own fears. As we labor, we feel the eyes of not only
our Presbytery and denomination, but of other Christian brothers and sisters within the evangelical
world. We fear getting things wrong. And we fear not understanding accurately the perspectives
of Revoice, Memorial, our brothers who sent letters of concern, and (by no means least) the many
same-sex-attracted (SSA) Christians in our churches. There has been much fearful and alarmist
rhetoric in these discussions already, and we fear adding to that cacophony instead of helping to
cast out fear so that love may be perfected.
We ask that all of our readers join us in the prayer and hope that the Holy Spirit would use this
report to help us all know and better love one another in grace and truth. We hope that as we do,
all those involved—our critics, Revoice, and Memorial, and our SSA brothers and sisters will
know that we have tried diligently to understand their concerns and fears.
A Word to the Critics
We understand how the critics can perceive the Revoice project as being a cloaked invasion of
LGBTQ+ propaganda into the church. When reading some of the Revoice workshops or seeing
incendiary or problematic social media posts from some of its attendees, it is easy to see how
people can become alarmed and not notice the nuances that are actually there. We see how the
insufficient communication by Revoice and its early mistakes added to the confusion and


                                                                                                      4
polarization in the heated debates around the conference. We can see how some might view the
Revoice project as no more than a way young evangelicals can embrace the culturally popular gay
narrative—the only caveat being, no sex. The committee has sympathy for how many sincere
critics of Revoice would find this frightening. We also agree with the critics that just because
someone refrains from sex, it does not mean that they are necessarily free from syncretistic worldly
ideas.
We believe there has been much misunderstanding and misrepresentation of what Revoice actually
teaches at the hands of its critics. But we also believe there are real disagreements between Revoice
and the critics. It is not simply that if critics only understood Revoice’s teachings better they would
come to understand that all their fears are unwarranted, and thus can safely be dismissed. There
are many threads in the Revoice rope, and some of them certainly have more potential for
syncretism—an improper blending of biblical truth with worldly ideas—than others. We are not
unaware of the tweets that sound like gay pride, the celibate gay couples who exhibit romantic
bonding, and the gay fellowships that seemingly emulate gay university groups.
Revoice is a complex phenomenon. By this we do not just mean that Revoice brings up
complicated questions—which it does. Rather, Revoice itself is not easy to define. The question
“What is Revoice?” in many ways became one of the most difficult questions for our committee
to answer. Who gets to give a definitive answer? In the lead up to the conference, Revoice, which
was in its infancy as an organization, put out very few statements on many of the contested issues,
especially compared to the number of statements written by other people about what they believe.
Is Revoice represented by Spiritual Friendship’s writers? Not completely. Is it represented by the
books written by keynote speakers? Perhaps, but there isn’t agreement across those authors on
every issue either. Maybe this or that critic who attended the conference understands what Revoice
really is, or maybe that blogger defending Revoice gets it right? The truth is, there were many
experiences of Revoice and many answers to what Revoice is about, all of which give insight,
while potentially missing other aspects of it.
It is understandable why so many critics who have expressed concern about Revoice would be
afraid. From the outside, Revoice sounds so much like the gay ideology of the world. These critics
remind the church that Paul warns believers not to be taken captive by philosophy and empty
deceit, according to human tradition, according to the elemental spirits of the world, and not
according to Christ (Col. 2:8). These voices remind us that the wider culture in which we now live
is flush with the philosophy of sexual freedom: people with homosexual desire should embrace it,
enjoy it, and celebrate it, because the supposition is that sexuality is a core aspect of our human
identity: “Be what you are sexually” about captures it. This philosophy teaches that gay people
should be encouraged to be “out” about their sexuality and proud of it in order to overcome old-
fashioned and deeply resented cultural messages shaped by homophobia that have only fostered a
sense of shame or unworthiness in gay people. In contemporary society pain in the life of the gay
person is generally rooted not in their own sexuality but in residual societal prejudices that view
homosexuality as bad. Care for the homosexual person, therefore, is not about helping the person
address his or her sexuality. It is about influencing systems and institutions to promote the welfare
of the gay person and reinforce narratives that see their sexual proclivities as private and non-
consequential, or even as a positive thing worthy of celebration. This philosophy is preached to us
non-stop by the way gay characters are portrayed on television and in film, by government policies,
and by civic Pride festivals. It is in the air we breathe.



                                                                                                     5
At first glance, it can seem like there is little difference between the Revoice project and the secular
LGBT narrative other than Revoice’s call to celibacy. Critics are right to point out that whether
we are adopting unbiblical worldviews is as important a question as whether we are living in
obedience to the sexual ethic given to us by the Lord. It is understandable that to many critics it
just looked like Revoice was taking its cues from the world and not from the Word of God. Both
secular gay activists and Revoice speakers stress that some people simply are in some sense gay
and must be accepted that way. Both appear to stress that gay is good (though Revoice leaders are
careful to distinguish between same-sex sexual desire, which they consider sinful, and those
desires “underneath” the sexual desire which are intrinsically good). To outsiders it can look like
the world is saying gay people should gather together into their own subculture and celebrate with
pride, and now people in the Church are saying gay people should gather together into their own
Christian imitation of that subculture and celebrate via Revoice.
Talking with and reading many critics of Revoice helped us understand these concerns and why
the language issue was so startling. We acknowledge that much of the language used by Revoice
leaders and speakers, both at the conference and in the online advertisements for it, sounded
alarmingly like the language used in gay-affirming circles across our society.
However, while we understand why many people became concerned, we were saddened to
discover that while so much criticism was leveled online and elsewhere, few people seem to have
bothered to call and talk with leaders at Memorial and Revoice. We commend those who did enter
into conversations and are grateful for how they shared their concerns with temperate language
and kindness. However, the wide dissemination of false information and mistaken assumptions
deeply wounded many of our brothers and sisters in Christ involved in the Revoice 18 conference.
We see much need of peace-making in front of us. Still, we are grateful that by talking things
through, at least some misunderstandings were cleared up, and forgiveness was encouraged where
people had been hurt in the controversy.
Our committee worked to sort out fact from (what we in time found to be) a significant amount of
misinformation and even conspiratorial accusations. We examined how and why Revoice uses the
language it does and why so many SSA young people were deeply and positively impacted by
Revoice. We discerned that the issues and questions have a nuance and complexity that are often
missed in tweets and blogs and even articles and books. It is far too simple to write off Revoice as
merely a Millennial movement too influenced by the world. Thinkers in the Revoice community
are asking thoughtful but complicated questions, and the Revoice project itself is a complex
phenomenon. Critics will have to decide whether to write off as mere posturing the following
statement made by Revoice founder, Dr. Nate Collins, or to trust the sincerity of it and pray that it
shapes the direction of Revoice. When asked in a Christianity Today online interview whether he
thought being homosexually-oriented was a gift, Collins answered:
        I’ve heard mostly progressive gay Christians talk about their gayness as a gift, and
        I don’t think that’s very helpful. It seems to be more rooted in an inability to
        conceive that there might be something sinful about their orientation. And that feels
        too aligned with “the spirit of our age”—that gay is good, as humanity is basically
        good. It’s not compatible with anything the Bible teaches about sin, and the fact
        that sin is part of everything we do.




                                                                                                      6
We recognize that questions about how SSA believers ought to and ought not to relate to secular
gay communities are complex ones. They touch on theological, missional, and pastoral themes
such as common grace, how our theology informs systemic injustices, and how our pastoral care
should balance concern over the sins of others perpetrated against SSA people with concern over
the SSA person’s own sinful inclinations and choices.
This is why we think the most important thing we can do is to reject the attitude that was exhibited
in a letter from a fellow teaching elder to our entire presbytery which concluded “for my part, as
long as you continue in this doctrine and practice you are not welcome at my dinner table nor in
my denomination.” We think the most important thing we can do right now is to bring people
together from our denomination not only around our dinner tables but also our conference tables,
to begin sorting through more of these matters together in a humble and civil way, so as to bring
unity and understanding.
A Word to Memorial, Revoice, and their Defenders
We also understand how the defenders of Revoice want to protect the Revoice project as something
that is meeting an important need. We affirm that the church has failed in many respects in its care
for SSA Christians in the past and the present. Far too many Christians who experience same-sex
attraction as they grow up in churches in our denomination feel isolated and alone. While the wider
culture capitulates to the sexual revolution, we have too often remained silent or spoken callously
to SSA persons. Like many para-church ministries, Revoice exists to fill a need that’s there because
of the failure of churches to address the spiritual and pastoral issues connected to homosexuality.
We believe that it is crucial for SSA Christians to have a home in our churches. SSA Christians
need to be dearly loved, discipled, to hear the Good News preached, to receive the sacraments, to
be given opportunities to use their gifts in the service of others, and to share in the life of the body
of Christ. Ultimately it is our hope that the raison d’être for ministries like Revoice might fade
away because the church would so fulfill its calling to support and shepherd SSA persons, that it
was no longer needed.
The criticisms we offer here to Revoice and Memorial are intended as the wounds of friends
(Proverbs 27:6), and the recommendations as encouraging counsel to our brothers and sisters. The
committee shares some of the fears of critics regarding several theological views that seem to us
to underlie the Revoice project, as well as the ethos of the conference itself. We hope that as a
nascent community Revoice will grow in its maturity and theological balance over time and
continue the process of defining and refining its teaching as it seems to have begun with its recent
statement of faith and statement on sexual ethics and Christian obedience.
We believe that the leaders of Revoice are our brothers and sisters with whom we share the bond
of fellowship as those yoked together with Christ. We believe that Memorial’s pastors and elders
are our dear brothers who are seeking to care for and disciple the many wounded same-sex-
attracted believers in their midst. Whatever our criticisms and their mistakes, we pray that the bond
that unites us in Christ might remain strong.


A Word on the Challenge Before Us




                                                                          