                                                                                                        1
                        Report of the Affirmations and Denials Committee

                      Appointed by Missouri Presbytery, October 2019 Stated Meeting
                                  Adopted June 2, 2020 Called Meeting
                                   TEs Doriani (Chair), Dalbey, Laughlin, Maney



                                                   Preface

In October 2019, Missouri Presbytery appointed a committee to establish a relatively short series of
affirmations and denials that state the biblical fundamentals for sexual ethics, especially focusing on
the question of homosexuality and identity. The moderator charged us to produce a work that is
biblical, theological, and pastoral.

Human sexuality is a biblical issue since Scripture addresses it. It is theological because it demands
careful reflection on Scripture. It is pastoral because the topic is controversial, in society and in the
church, even among many who call themselves evangelicals. As Western culture has ever-changing
views of marriage and sexuality, church members and church visitors fall under its influence. All
need to hear the biblical message. While we have written affirmations and denials, we believe
pastoral care begins with compassionate listening. A small percentage of the population is primarily
or exclusively drawn sexually or erotically to the same sex. Sexual experimentation and seductions
cause additional problems. For most, homoerotic feelings begin as an unwelcome discovery of
differentness. Young people often feel horrified or ashamed. They fear discovery; many consider
suicide. We must be compassionate toward our neighbors and brothers and sisters who experience
strong same-sex attraction. Sadly, too often, the church has added shame and opprobrium, so that
people feel silenced and marginalized. For many a “gay identity” emphasis is a way to cope with the
loss of friends, family, and Christian community. We must foster compassion personally and
ecclesiastically. It is for these reasons that we have found ourselves thankful for the insight of the late
John Stott, who reminds us to never lose sight of the fact that there lies within the homosexual
experience “a deep loneliness, the natural human hunger for mutual love, a search for identity, and a
longing for completeness” (Missouri Presbytery’s Report of the Ad Hoc Committee to Investigate
Memorial Church and Revoice, p. 74). We must foster compassion and empathy in ourselves and the
church.

This document, which was adopted with a very strong majority by Missouri Presbytery at a called
meeting on June 2, 2020, draws on many sources: Scripture, the Westminster Standards, and Missouri
Presbytery’s studies on sexuality and homosexuality from 1994, 2017, and 2019.1 While this report

1
  This report was adopted by Missouri Presbytery on June 2, 2020, but this report was completed
before the release of the report by the PCA’s Ad Interim Committee on Human Sexuality, on May
28, 2020. This document therefore has no literary link to that report. This committee believes its
report is consistent with the PCA Ad Interim Committee’s “Twelve Statements” on human sexuality
and we commend them.
                                                                                                     2
does not attempt to condense those studies, it seeks continuity with them. We tried to prepare a clear,
concise biblical theology of sexuality and homosexuality. We present this document as a set of core
convictions. A set of affirmations and denials is a blunt instrument and pastors must use them with
care as they communicate biblical teaching on homosexuality.

Note on our language: After long reflection, the committee chose to use the terms “same-sex
attraction” and “same-sex attracted” for the experience of sexual, erotic, or romantic desire or longing
for persons of the same sex. When we use the term, we do not mean to refer to practices, behavior, or
allegiances. We use it to describe the experience of sexual, erotic, or romantic desire or longing for
persons of the same sex. (We do not mean to declare that the term “same-sex attraction” is “the
correct term”; we simply judged that “same-sex attraction” was less likely to be misunderstood).
Degrees of attraction can be variable. Same-sex attracted persons may find the same sex somewhat or
very appealing. They may or may not also experience sexual, romantic, or erotic attraction to the
opposite sex and may or may not enter into a complete, biblical marriage.

This committee does not advocate the use of “gay Christian” as a self-description in ordinary speech.
Yet we recognize that any term one uses—gay, same-sex attracted, homosexual, homophile, queer,
and others—is problematic in certain cases for certain people. Another committee may wish to use
other terms. Wishing to heed Paul’s admonition to neither condemn nor despise one another over
debatable matters (Rom. 14:1–12), we believe Christian liberty grants believers a degree of latitude as
they describe themselves. Most words are flexible, with several meanings and nuances that vary from
one place and time to another. Christians should have a certain freedom of expression for the sake of
communication. For example, a pastor may not prefer to use the word “abuse” publicly because it
plays into powerlessness/victimization narratives, but may yet use the term in conversation.

                                           Part One:
           A Concise Biblical Theology of Sexuality with Reference to Homosexuality

Marriage and Sexuality in God’s Creation (Genesis 1–2; Proverbs 5; WCF 24)

   1. We affirm that God, as Lord of creation and redemption has lovingly revealed his will for
      marriage and sexuality.
   2. Sexuality is God’s good gift to mankind. God designed human sexuality to bring him glory
      and to promote human flourishing.
   3. God wills believers to honor him with their bodies. This includes sexual intimacy in marriage
      (Rom. 12:1; 1 Cor. 6:19–20).
   4. God instituted marriage before the fall. When the Lord created mankind in his image, he made
      them male and female, blessed them with a capacity for love, and ordained monogamous
      marriage as the place for sexual union between a man and woman.
                                                                                                  3
   5. We affirm that the sexual union of husband and wife normally seals a marriage and expresses
      affection between husband and wife (Gen. 2:18–25; 24:67). We deny that sexual acts between
      two people of the same sex accord with God’s creational design. Such acts are not able to
      consummate a marriage.
   6. Husband and wife should hold fast to each other, as one flesh. What God joins no one should
      separate (Gen. 2:23–25; Matt. 19:4–6).
   7. Sexual union, within marriage, includes a procreative goal. Sexual union ordinarily leads to
      the blessing of children, even godly children (Gen. 1:26–28; Mal. 2:15). Loving sexual
      intimacy is normally a lifelong feature of marriage, health permitting.
   8. We affirm that Scripture blesses singleness. Scripture affirms and blesses marriage, but does
      not command it. We affirm that God gives some believers the gift of singleness, freeing them
      to live joyful lives of obedience and service (1 Cor. 7:7; WLC 138).
   9. We deny that sexuality and marriage are social constructs with infinitely malleable traits. We
      deny that God’s design can be disregarded at will and without cost.
  10. We deny that God designed sexual union to occur outside the structure of marriage between
      one man and one woman.
  11. We deny that sexuality exists merely for the sake of physical pleasure and personal
      fulfillment.
The Fall and Sexuality

  12. We affirm that sin has corrupted every aspect of human life, including sexuality. It has also
      corrupted every human institution, including marriage (WCF 6.4). Sin includes actual sin,
      original sin, and indwelling sin (or “corruption of nature,” WCF 6.5), all of which are the
      proper foci of repentance (Ps. 51:1–5; Luke 18:13).
  13. Human sinfulness often manifests itself in human sexuality, including disordered desires, lust,
      mental sins, and physical sins. Sexual temptation arising from indwelling sin commonly
      assails us and often leads to enacted sexual sin (Rom. 8:22–23; James 1:14–15; WCF 6.4).
  14. Same-sex attraction is a result of the fall (WCF 6.6; WSC 14, 16). It is contrary to God’s
      design physically and morally and is a form of indwelling sin to be lamented and mortified
      (Col. 3:5). We deny that same-sex attraction would have occurred apart from the fall and
      deny that same-sex attraction will be a feature of the new creation.
  15. While heterosexual attraction often becomes sinful, through lust, God intrinsically ordered
      heterosexual attraction to a proper end in marriage and procreation. Same-sex attraction
      does not have a proper end in marriage or procreation.
  16. Though homosexual sin—both in desire and action—is intrinsically disordered (Rom. 1:22–
      25), and, therefore, truly and properly sin (WCF 6.5), we affirm that there is no sin so small
      that it does not deserve damnation and no sin so great that it cannot be forgiven by Christ
      (WCF 15.4). We affirm the same with regard to all disordered heterosexual desire, which can
      be judged to be sin.
Redemption, Marriage, and Sexuality
                                                                                                   4


  17. We affirm that the completed work of Christ atones for all of the sins of a believer. Through
      faith, union with Christ the Redeemer, the gifts of the Spirit, and the support of the church,
      believers can and should mortify all sexual sin and stir up the grace of God that is in them
      (WCF 13.1–3).
  18. The Lord may relieve believers of sexual lust or they may long battle it as besetting,
      indwelling sin. Although temptations can endure, believers should hope and pray for
      deliverance from sexual temptation (WCF 13.3).
  19. Believers can face the prospect of long, arduous obedience, even in the face of indwelling sin
      (WCF 9.4) and ongoing temptation (Rom. 7:14–25). Although it is possible to be tempted
      without sinning (1 Cor. 10:13), to willfully desire something which, if attained, would be
      sinful, is to participate in sin.
  20. We deny that realism about struggles with sin (sexual or otherwise) necessarily constitutes
      making peace with sin or giving up on sanctification. Believers may or may not be released
      from ungodly desires in this life. The path to sanctification is not wholly predictable. In fact,
      realistic expectations can foster perseverance (James 1:2–4). Our Larger Catechism itself
      acknowledges that “in this life . . . [sanctification] is neither equal in all, nor in this life,
      perfect in any” (WLC 77).
  21. We deny that changing from having same-sex attraction to opposite-sex attraction is the only
      gauge by which to judge progressive sanctification (WCF 13.2). However, God does enable
      believers more and more to die unto sin (WSC 35) and grow in self-control (Prov. 25:28; 2
      Tim. 2:15; Gal. 5:23).
  22. Correction of any sexual sin must be gentle and humble, since all are prone to sin (Gal. 6:1–4;
      2 Tim. 2:24–25), and must include a call to repentance, faith, and walking in newness of life
      (Rom. 6:1–14).
  23. We deny that the presence of homosexual temptations disqualifies a person from getting
      married. We also deny that the apostle Paul’s dictum, “It is better to marry than to burn [with
      passion]” (1 Cor. 7:9), requires that all homosexually-inclined people must get married. For
      some believers, homosexual desires may endure, making the prospect of entering a biblical
      marriage seem unlikely. However, God may grant a believer who experiences same-sex
      attraction love and affection for someone of the opposite sex, making a joyful, complete
      marriage possible. We encourage openness to this.
  24. The local church should function as a spiritual family that grants acceptance, love, and
      community to all believers, including those with ongoing same-sex attractions. Faithful
      believers who experience same-sex attraction should be welcomed and encouraged to use their
      gifts in service in the church.

Marriage and Sexuality in the New Heavens and New Earth

  25. We affirm that Jesus will return to establish an everlasting kingdom and to judge all people:
      unbelievers will be condemned to eternal damnation and believers will be welcomed into
      eternal glory (WCF 33.1).
                                                                                                        5
     26. In glory, God’s elect will be fully and forever freed from all sins and miseries (WLC 90),
         including those arising from sinful homosexual desires. Their sinful dispositions, temptations,
         and the ability to sin will end (Rev. 21:4).
     27. Physical bodies will be resurrected as spiritual bodies. The elect will honor God with their
         bodies (1 Cor. 15:40; WCF 32). In the new creation, the church will be the perfected bride of
         Christ and marriage between men and women will cease (Matt. 22:30; Ephesians 5; Rev.
         19:7–9; WCF 17.1).
     28. While we affirm that some cultural identification will continue in the new creation, we deny
         that there will be any identification with any former sin in the new creation (Rev. 21:22–27).


                                             Part Two:
                             Homosexuality and Identity in Current Debate

     29. We affirm the dignity of all people as God’s image bearers, regardless of the way the fall has
         impacted their experience of their sexuality. We deny that heterosexual people stand on higher
         or lower moral ground before God (Rom. 3:19–25).
     30. Same-sex attraction, homosexual behaviors, or any type of gay identity would not have
         occurred apart from the fall.
     31. We affirm that friendship is a beautiful biblical category and that “friends can become closer
         than brothers” (Prov. 18:24). We deny that friendships should be confused with marriages.
         The Bible does not recognize any relationship between two people of the same sex as a
         replacement for, or type of, marriage (WCF 22.7)
     32. Original sin manifests itself in disease, pain, disordered desires, lust, mental sins, and physical
         sins. Sexual temptation arising from indwelling sin commonly assails us and often leads to
         actual sexual sin (Rom. 8:22–23; James 1:14–15). We deny such temptations are morally
         neutral.
     33. Same-sex attraction is a result of the fall both as a transgression of God’s law and as a
         consequence of mankind’s estate of sin and misery (WCF 6.6; WSC 14, 16). It is contrary to
         God’s design physically and morally and is a form of indwelling sin. Whether the presence of
         temptation is chosen or unchosen, one is responsible for resisting sinful desires and mortifying
         sin in one’s life.
     34. We affirm that there is a distinction between same-sex desires and temptations and the
         commission of sinful acts. We affirm that all sinners need Jesus’s redemption, which atones
         for all forms of sin: inherited sin, sinful dispositions, and sinful acts.
     35. We affirm that Scripture says homosexual lusts, passions, and acts are shameful (Rom. 1:24–
         27) and that to even speak of them amongst God’s people in a trite manner is inappropriate
         (Eph. 5:3–5). We deny that the call to a life of repentance of same-sex sexuality consigns
         people with same-sex attractions to a life of morbid introspection and self-loathing.2
     36. We affirm that same-sex desires belong to the category of “groaning” as we wait for the


2
    From Missouri Presbytery’s Homosexuality and the Gospel of Grace (2017), 23.
                                                                                                    6
      redemption of our bodies (Rom. 8:22–25). It is common to humanity to endure all sorts of
      disorders of body, mind, will, emotion, and heart.
37.   Because God created all people in his image and grants them common grace, we affirm that
      Christians should look for virtues, gifts, and blessings in the lives of all people, including
      those who are same-sex attracted. We deny that Scripture calls Christians to look for virtues,
      gifts, or blessings within any of our sinful tendencies.
38.   We affirm that God has delivered his people from the domain of darkness and into the
      kingdom of his beloved Son, in whom we have redemption and the forgiveness of sins (Col.
      1:13–14). This salvation forgives all sin, covers all shame, and engrafts us into God’s family.
      We deny that the promise of this gospel is any different for same-sex attracted people.
39.   We affirm that it is possible to be tempted by sinful sexual desires without committing a sinful
      act. First Corinthians 10:13 says that God provides a “way of escape” during temptation.
      Although Jesus’s temptation was unique since he had no sinful nature or habits, Scripture says
      Jesus faced external temptation without sinning. We deny that the indwelling sinful desires
      that cause temptation necessarily lead to actual sin. Scripture distinguishes between desire that
      causes temptation and desire that gives birth to sinful acts: “But each person is tempted when
      he is lured and enticed by his own desire. Then desire when it has conceived gives birth to sin,
      and sin when it is fully grown brings forth death” (James 1:14–15; WLC 195).
40.   We affirm the church community as the primary context whereby Christians grow in Christ-
      like character and mortify sin. Churches should lovingly use the means of grace to
      encourage same-sex attracted members who are sincerely striving to put to death their sin and
      grow in Christ-likeness.
41.   We affirm that church community is the place where we learn to love one another as God, in
      Christ, has loved us (1 John 3:23; Rom. 15:7). To that end, the church can teach heterosexual
      and same-sex attracted Christians how to relate to Christian brothers and sisters of the same
      sex and opposite sex in a God-honoring way (1 Tim. 5:1–2).
42.   We affirm that many who experienced homosexual desires will stand among God’s people
      on the last day (1 Cor. 6:11; Rev. 7:9–17). We deny that those with homosexual desires will
      be a separate tribe in heaven and deny that they will present themselves or their culture as a
      “queer” treasure.
43.   We affirm that the essential elements of a believer’s current identity are creation in the image
      of God as male or female (Gen. 1:27–28), a sinful nature (Rom. 3:23), and—most
      importantly—union with Christ by faith (Gal. 2:20). We deny that sin will identify Christians
      in the new heavens and new earth.
44.   We affirm that Christians can describe specific forms of sinfulness as part of their present life,
      so that one can say “I am the king of excuses” or “I am a workaholic” or “I am an alcoholic.”
      To say this is not to claim an identity, but to identify sin or sinful tendencies. Although
      believers do not ordinarily say “I am a male Christian” or “I am an Arab Christian,” there are
      occasions to do so. In dialogue, one might also say, “I am a gay Christian.” The terms “male
      Christian,” “Arab Christian,” and “gay Christian” are not semantically identical, since the first
      two label innocent aspects of identity.
                                                                                                      7
  45. We affirm that Scripture gives disciples latitude in self-expression. The Bible has dozens of “I
      am . . .” statements, including “I am a worm” (David, Ps. 22:6), “I am a Pharisee” (Paul, on
      trial, Acts 23:6), “I am a Levite” (Judg.17:9), “I am a widow” (2 Sam. 14:5), “I am a
      sojourner” (Ps. 119:19), “I am a brother of jackals” (Job 30:29) and “I am a sinful man” (Luke
      5:8). These “I am” statements include confessions of current sinfulness: “I am a man of
      unclean lips” (Isa. 6:5), and “Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am
      the foremost.” We deny that these statement describe the identity of the speakers, but affirm
      that they identify an ongoing struggle to break with sin (1 Pet. 4:1-4).
  46. In regard to language, we affirm that the command to love others and to preserve the
      conscience of weaker brothers compels believers in Christ to put aside their own liberties for
      one another (Rom. 13:8; 14:19–22). Still, Christians should study debated matters, form
      convictions, and may advance them as they seek peace, joy, and righteousness (Rom. 14:17–
      19). We deny that the “pretense of Christian liberty” ever permits a believer to “practice any
      sin or cherish any lust,” since that destroys the goal of Christian liberty (WCF 20.3).
  47. We affirm that it is good to attend to “the rights of all the afflicted” (Prov. 31:4–5). Therefore,
      the church should weep with those who have been silenced or mistreated and affirm the need
      to treat them with justice and compassion. We recognize that it is dangerous to create an
      atmosphere in which individual members find it increasingly difficult to reveal themselves as
      Christians in need of the grace of sanctification.
  48. We affirm that the legacy of the ex-gay movement and conversion therapy—however well-
      intended—has left many in our midst wounded, alienated, and traumatized. But we deny that
      the biblical sexual ethic itself is inherently violent to gay people. Rather, it is a law that gives
      freedom to those who, by grace, are united to Jesus our Savior.
  49. We affirm that due to their own sin and the sins of others, many people who identify as gay
      struggle with shame over who they are. We deny that the solution for shame is to take pride
      in or to celebrate a gay identity; rather, the solution is found in our identity as children of
      God (1 John 3:1–2). We deny that anyone should take pleasure or pride in his sins or sinful
      inclinations.
                                             Conclusion
We offer these Affirmations and Denials as a guide for elders in Missouri Presbytery as they seek to
care faithfully for congregants who are same-sex attracted. We do not, however, recommend that
elders begin by disseminating this document directly to those seeking to live faithfully before the
Lord as they contend with unwanted sexual desires. Rather, pastoral care requires that we first listen
in a gentle manner, since each person’s story is unique, and then respond with discernment and
love. We do hope these Affirmations and Denials will help elders offer guidance that is biblically
faithful. While we do not wish to remove liberty of conscience on disputable matters, we believe
these statements capture essential orthodox teachings regarding a biblical sex ethic and the
particularity of homosexual experience in the lives of professed believers. We pray that this
document will help elders discern wisely when considering endorsing parachurch ministries that
address homosexuality and gay identity. It is our sincere hope that these Affirmations and Denials
                                                                                                    8
promote clarity for Missouri Presbytery and help to promote the peace, purity, and mission of the
church.

TE Dan Doriani, Committee Chair
TE Mark Dalbey
TE Ryan Laughlin
TE Sean Maney
